[Amit Varma]: What were our maharajas like?
[Amit Varma]: That's actually a silly question to ask.
[Amit Varma]: Because maharajas were people too.
[Amit Varma]: And people contain multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: Back in the days of our military states, we had maharajas who were Sanskrit scholars.
[Amit Varma]: We had maharajas who were drunk in the salute all the time.
[Amit Varma]: We had maharajas who were great sportsmen and also shitty sportsmen.
[Amit Varma]: Some maharajas were doctors in practice medicine.
[Amit Varma]: And there was even one who allegedly liked to fornicate with his elephant.
[Amit Varma]: Jumbo my darling.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, where there are multitudes, there must also be simplistic narratives.
[Amit Varma]: And interestingly, the most common simplistic narrative about the maharajas was one propagated
[Amit Varma]: by both the British Empire and their enemies, the Freedom Fighters of India, led by the
[Amit Varma]: Congress.
[Amit Varma]: For the British, the maharajas were a bunch of ridiculous feudal autocrats incapable of
[Amit Varma]: governing wisely.
[Amit Varma]: So the British had to do it for them.
[Amit Varma]: For the Freedom Fighters, the maharajas were, well, a bunch of ridiculous feudal autocrats
[Amit Varma]: incapable of governing wisely.
[Amit Varma]: And so independent India had to be constructed without them.
[Amit Varma]: This narrative suited both parties.
[Amit Varma]: This narrative is false.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is a brilliant young historian, Manu Pillay, who has been on my show three
[Amit Varma]: times before.
[Amit Varma]: Each of those episodes were wildly popular, just like his books, and I'll link them from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: His latest book is called False Allies, India's Maharajas in the Age of Ravi Verma, and focuses
[Amit Varma]: on busting simple stereotypes around our maharajas with powerful storytelling centered around
[Amit Varma]: the princely states of Travancore, Pudukottai, Baroda, Mysore, and Mewar.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, Manu's books should be a model for how to write history because of the way they
[Amit Varma]: combine gripping storytelling with rigorous research.
[Amit Varma]: When I first recorded with him for The Seen and The Unseen, I compared his book Rebel
[Amit Varma]: Sultans to The Game of Thrones.
[Amit Varma]: That's how much fun he is to read.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, that's how much bloodshed there is in the book as well.
[Amit Varma]: And 30% of each book of his consists of extensive footnotes and endnotes, which speaks to the
[Amit Varma]: depth of his research and offers us so many rabbit holes to explore.
[Amit Varma]: So let's move on to this conversation now.
[Amit Varma]: But before we begin, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Over the last year, I've enjoyed teaching my online course, The Art of Clear Writing,
[Amit Varma]: and an online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction with much stimulation.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, and a lovely and lively community at the end
[Amit Varma]: of it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST, or about $150.
[Amit Varma]: And the October classes begin on the 9th of October.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer does not require God-given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Manu, welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Pleasure being here, I think the fourth time.
[Amit Varma]: It is indeed the fourth time and you said something delightful as you stepped into my
[Amit Varma]: house.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, this is the first episode we're recording in my little makeshift home studio, which
[Amit Varma]: I intend to get properly sound treated, but listeners do give feedback on what you feel
[Amit Varma]: about the sound of this because remote recording sounds aren't always the best.
[Amit Varma]: So I just thought rather than try to kind of book a studio every time, it's convenient
[Amit Varma]: to have a studio at home.
[Amit Varma]: But as Manu entered my home, he said that he has a distinction of doing the first longest
[Amit Varma]: episode with me, which basically meant that one of the episodes we did, and I forget which
[Amit Varma]: one, and they were all wildly popular, was the longest at the time.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of my readers, I think it was a good Sudhir Sarnobat, did this interactive
[Amit Varma]: chart on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: Do you see that now where essentially it was a map of all my episodes and how the length
[Amit Varma]: went up.
[Amit Varma]: I see.
[Amit Varma]: So it just kept on going up.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, I reached four hours, 59 minutes in episode 200.
[Amit Varma]: But that's kind of cheating because I was a guest there with people like you kindly
[Amit Varma]: asking questions.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that one special episode, I've hit four hours a couple of times, I think
[Amit Varma]: so.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing that we haven't really done in the three episodes that we've done, which
[Amit Varma]: we haven't really covered, is something that I try to do now in all the episodes I do,
[Amit Varma]: which is talk about your kind of personal life and get to know you a little better by
[Amit Varma]: personal life.
[Amit Varma]: I don't mean personal life.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, your history kind of.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about, you know, where you grew up, what kind of kid you were, and
[Amit Varma]: so on.
[Guest]: We can start there.
[Guest]: I grew up in Pune.
[Guest]: I was born in Kerala, but I grew up in Pune.
[Guest]: I was the kind of kid who got into, I mean, it's not something that comes across to people
[Guest]: anymore because now I look very dignified and proper, but in those days I was up to
[Guest]: very strange things.
[Guest]: I used to throw myself down staircases, try and jump out of the balcony.
[Guest]: I set my house on fire once.
[Guest]: I used to have these hot wheel cars, which I used to drench in deodorant and set them
[Guest]: on fire and then watch them zoom around while they were lit.
[Guest]: So it was not a very ordinary childhood in terms of my personal leanings and inclinations.
[Guest]: It was a lot of fun.
[Guest]: I was a social child, very happy, running around, you know, plenty of friends and things
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: Reading happened when I was about 11 or 12.
[Guest]: That's when my sister, basically to calm me down, thrust a book into my hand and said
[Guest]: read.
[Guest]: And it started with the comics and then slowly graduated to other books.
[Guest]: I remember writing an essay for my school newspaper.
[Guest]: I don't think it got published, about when I read David Copperfield for the first time.
[Guest]: It was my first long book, 600 pages, I think, the unabridged version.
[Guest]: And it felt like an achievement because I was 12 or 13.
[Guest]: And then from there, you know, I took an interest in reading, took an interest in history and
[Guest]: you know, eventually ended up writing.
[Guest]: The writing initially used to be, you know, funny little skits for school.
[Guest]: I remember writing a funny poem about my bench partner in school.
[Guest]: It wasn't rude.
[Guest]: It was sort of a comical account describing her and she obviously didn't like it.
[Guest]: She tore it.
[Guest]: But yeah, I was, you know, I had a good childhood in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: Nothing to complain about.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I remember an anecdote you told me about your childhood, but it was I think not
[Amit Varma]: on the record.
[Amit Varma]: It was off the record, where when you were 16, you took a rat or something and you held
[Amit Varma]: it in a bucket to see if it would drown.
[Amit Varma]: And it did.
[Guest]: Is that true?
[Guest]: Yes, that was.
[Guest]: It wasn't when I was 16.
[Guest]: I was a little younger than that.
[Guest]: Maybe 13, 14.
[Guest]: And you know, my grandfather caught the rat.
[Guest]: This was in his house in Kerala, old houses, they've got plenty of mice and things running
[Guest]: around.
[Guest]: And he caught it in a little, almost like a cage.
[Guest]: The trap was like a cage.
[Guest]: And he said, go release it outside.
[Guest]: But then somewhere I had heard something about a bucket and something.
[Guest]: So I decided to try and see if I could, you know, conduct this experiment where I sort
[Guest]: of drowned the rat.
[Guest]: And it was not very pleasant afterwards.
[Guest]: It did die.
[Guest]: And you know, it felt, it's very strange at the age of 13, that kind of power over another
[Guest]: creature.
[Guest]: It's a, I wouldn't say it's intoxicating, but it was different.
[Guest]: You could feel that power.
[Guest]: And I felt very bad afterwards.
[Guest]: The instant it died, I felt so guilty.
[Guest]: And then I turned vegetarian for seven years, because I thought that was the only way I
[Guest]: could expiate my sin.
[Guest]: But yeah, eventually, at the age of 21, I again started eating eggs and then slowly
[Guest]: graduated to chicken occasionally and gave up my guilt about killing the poor animal.
[Guest]: But yeah, that was my homicidal thing at that time.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think Amitav Kumar wrote an essay once or a book about how in Bihar, a particular
[Amit Varma]: place to eat rats, to catch rats and eat them.
[Amit Varma]: So when you said intoxicating, I thought it will set you down a very interesting path,
[Amit Varma]: but it clearly...
[Guest]: Well, one day, if I become a dictator, well, probably very dangerous thing, because clearly,
[Guest]: you know, imagine 13 year old and just having that kind of control over another living being,
[Guest]: it was scary.
[Guest]: You know, now that I think of it, what was I thinking?
[Guest]: Was I some kind of crazy child?
[Guest]: Anyway, the fact that I felt guilt immediately after, I think, can give me some relief that
[Guest]: I wasn't completely out of that moral limit that we place on ourselves, which is, yeah,
[Guest]: which is, it's good to know that I have that moral limit.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, just just thinking of that impulse reminds me of this beautiful book by Ryu Murakami,
[Amit Varma]: the other Murakami, as it were, a book called Piercing, where the book begins with this
[Amit Varma]: guy sleeping in a room with his wife and the babies in the crib.
[Amit Varma]: And he gets up and he has this uncontrollable desire to stab the baby.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, he doesn't actually want to do it because it's his baby, but he has this
[Amit Varma]: uncontrollable desire.
[Amit Varma]: So and he knows that the only way to quench this, the only way he can save his baby is
[Amit Varma]: by going out and killing someone else.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the rest of the book.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a it's a fabulous book and one of those things where you don't kind of need
[Amit Varma]: to explain something, the impulse is just there and the way it unfolds so naturally
[Amit Varma]: you feel, yeah, I mean, this is what could happen.
[Guest]: Human beings are weird.
[Guest]: We're such complicated, strange creatures, there's really no predicting how a human being
[Guest]: can behave.
[Guest]: There's, you know, only so much conditioning you can do.
[Guest]: At the end of it, I think every human being is capable of sort of, you know, breaking
[Guest]: out of that and becoming something completely different.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, people often ask with astonishment that how come in Hitler's time so many ordinary
[Amit Varma]: Germans were kind of privy to that thing.
[Amit Varma]: Hannah Arendt used the phrase the banality of evil.
[Amit Varma]: And without getting too much into current politics, I think we see that, you know, it's
[Amit Varma]: not that unusual shit can happen.
[Amit Varma]: So how did you then move towards like, did you have a fascination with history, particularly
[Amit Varma]: as a genre?
[Amit Varma]: Or was it just storytelling and history kind of fit into that?
[Amit Varma]: Like was there a time when you started reading history, and after that, was there a time
[Amit Varma]: when you said that I want to write history?
[Guest]: Well, it began, frankly, with just stories about my ancestors, I would hear from my grandmother.
[Guest]: And it wasn't like these people, these were famous people or anything, it was just that
[Guest]: the way she related the doings of her uncles, her great uncles, her father, her mother,
[Guest]: they didn't feel like great grandmother, great grandfather, they just felt like really funny,
[Guest]: interesting people, you know, so to begin with just seeing older people in your family,
[Guest]: not as relatives, not as these esteemed sort of, you know, older figures, but as individuals,
[Guest]: that was very special, and I started getting interested in the stories of people.
[Guest]: So I would read a lot of biographies, I would read, and then that obviously is linked to
[Guest]: history, because if you're reading about people long dead and gone, naturally, you know, you're
[Guest]: going to pick up history books.
[Guest]: From there, it sort of picked up.
[Guest]: And then, you know, as we did that podcast on the ivory throne, I found that story at
[Guest]: the age of 18, the story of this Queen, female Maharaja of Travancore, who sort of ends up
[Guest]: lapsing into oblivion and dying as a nobody after having much power and money and all
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: And I thought, here's an interesting story, and I want to sort of peel back the layers.
[Guest]: So it was part interest in the biography, but also in the history.
[Guest]: And since then, history sort of, you know, become the main thing, but I still try and
[Guest]: connect it often to the people who populate history, not in the sense necessarily of great
[Guest]: men and great women, but trying to just understand history by looking at it through their eyes,
[Guest]: as opposed to in the abstract or in the context of economic trends and things like that.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, it was a it was a process.
[Amit Varma]: And where did the bit about learning how to do history come from?
[Amit Varma]: Because it's one thing to have an interest in history to read a lot of history books
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: You know, how do you get that discipline?
[Amit Varma]: And you became a historian in a sense when you were very young, right?
[Amit Varma]: The Throne was written when you were what, 11, 12, finished when I was 25, yes, when
[Amit Varma]: you were 25.
[Amit Varma]: So what's that kind of daunting or did it help that you were too young to know better?
[Amit Varma]: And you just kind of dived into it?
[Amit Varma]: How did you learn that bit of doing history?
[Guest]: I think, you know, nobody was there to guide me at that time, I was doing it entirely privately,
[Guest]: I was managing jobs, etc.
[Guest]: But the thing is, I took to the archives like a duck to water.
[Guest]: For some reason, it I love the space, I love the silence, I love touching files that were
[Guest]: so old, that nobody had touched before.
[Guest]: And then I think I just formed an aptitude and, you know, managing that kind of primary
[Guest]: material, interpreting it, reading academic material that helps you interpret it.
[Guest]: And then you pick up the skills and then you slowly realize that yeah, this is what historians
[Guest]: do as well.
[Guest]: Which is why, you know, Shashi Tharoor once told me that when he read my book, he said
[Guest]: this could have been your PhD thesis.
[Guest]: And I said, yes, this always happens, I write a book and then realize that I could have
[Guest]: just done this as a PhD thesis instead of a private book.
[Guest]: Now I'm doing a PhD separately, which is nothing connected to any of these books I've written.
[Guest]: But you know, it's just, it's a habit I picked up.
[Guest]: And since then, once I decided consciously that I wanted to stick to this, then obviously
[Guest]: you start figuring out the methods properly, the rigor, the approaches you're supposed
[Guest]: to take.
[Guest]: And you consciously read up on the latest academic research just to make sure that you're
[Guest]: on top of what is happening in the field more broadly.
[Guest]: But yeah, the beginnings were almost by accident, you know, I had decided I wanted to do this
[Guest]: book that became the ivory throne eventually.
[Guest]: I decided I wanted to be in London and decided to go there for a master's so I could access
[Guest]: the archives.
[Guest]: And from there, it just took a life of its own.
[Guest]: And habit just turned into, I mean, luckily, for all you know, you know, you often do find
[Guest]: people who do history books without necessarily doing all the hard work that they should.
[Guest]: So luckily for me, I would like to believe that that didn't happen.
[Guest]: The six years that I took to write the book, I wasn't in a hurry.
[Guest]: I ended up taking the time and I think giving myself that kind of time also meant that I
[Guest]: was growing up in the process, which meant I was also getting more mature about how I
[Guest]: was reading the same subject, reading the same materials and files again.
[Guest]: So you know, the drafts that were written when I was 22, very different from the drafts
[Guest]: that were published at the age of 25, because much changed in that time.
[Guest]: But I began not because of any academic guidance or a degree or any kind of official training.
[Guest]: The training came after I'd already picked up a lot of the skills just in terms of streamlining
[Amit Varma]: what I had.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you mentioned sort of doing a PhD, which, you know, you're doing one now
[Amit Varma]: and I asked why.
[Amit Varma]: And that leads me to sort of another question about, say, academic historians, and people
[Amit Varma]: who are not academic historians.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, you know, there is a certain amount of resentment among academic historians
[Amit Varma]: of popular historians who haven't paid the dues, so to say, and I'm just going out there
[Amit Varma]: and doing that.
[Amit Varma]: But my question is not just about that, but something larger, which is about the relevance
[Amit Varma]: of a lot of academic paths that people take.
[Amit Varma]: Like what, for example, I can't fathom is that when you have written these acclaimed
[Amit Varma]: books of history, why would you want to do a PhD?
[Amit Varma]: What is the relevance?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, okay, you know, within certain circles, it can still be considered, you know, a mark
[Amit Varma]: of respect and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But you are a historian, you are a, you know, respected historian, no one criticizes your
[Amit Varma]: methods or anything like that, then why the PhD?
[Amit Varma]: And also, what are the kind of trade offs, like what role does the whole academic discipline?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I know what role it has played for the decades, because you need history and
[Amit Varma]: you need historians.
[Amit Varma]: But going forward, where you don't have to depend on gatekeepers or degrees or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: anyone can just get in there and do history if they are passionate about much like you
[Amit Varma]: did, you know, will the relevance or the role of academic historians change?
[Amit Varma]: And I sort of ask this, because I think about this in other fields, for example, where academics
[Amit Varma]: is elapsing more and more into irrelevance, you know, many fields whenever relevant anyway,
[Amit Varma]: history is very relevant and very important.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your sort of thinking on this?
[Amit Varma]: And why are you doing a PhD?
[Guest]: Well, the you know, the whole question of resentment on the part of certain academic
[Guest]: historians for popular historians, you know, that I don't think that exists that much in
[Guest]: the West, because a lot of academic historians do write for popular presses and trade presses
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: The my favorite example I give in many places is Mary Beard, you know, she's a proper scholar,
[Guest]: she's a very senior scholar, but she also wrote a book like SPQR, which is for a lay
[Guest]: audience and they don't see it very much as an ego issue.
[Guest]: Whereas I think in India, there's still some of that ego thing, which is that if you're
[Guest]: an academic historian, you don't write in a way that can even remotely be called storytelling.
[Guest]: You know, storytelling is a bad word, you're meant to use the jargon, etc.
[Guest]: And I have an allergy for that.
[Guest]: I don't like jargon.
[Guest]: I don't like words like epistemic, whatever that is.
[Guest]: I can't even pronounce it properly.
[Guest]: It's just not, it doesn't come to me naturally, because history to me feels like something
[Guest]: you should take out into the world.
[Guest]: You know, on the one hand, we complain that people are perverting history, misusing history.
[Guest]: But then if you're not going to make an effort to actually communicate good history in an
[Guest]: accessible way to large numbers of people, you sort of lose the right to complain about
[Guest]: these other things that are happening.
[Guest]: You can fill a gap with fake news because a gap exists, you know, whereas if you try
[Guest]: and bridge the gap properly, then you know, it becomes a very different kind of game altogether.
[Guest]: And you can be in a position of strength.
[Guest]: So yeah, I mean, and I have no reason to complain, of course, the only resentment I've got from
[Guest]: academic historians are from my contemporaries, not from senior historians.
[Guest]: I've got glowing reviews in peer reviewed journals, I've got awards and things like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: I've been invited to give lectures in fairly academic sort of settings.
[Guest]: So none of that really worries me.
[Guest]: But you know, PhD still, if you want to teach, for example, tomorrow, then it's useful to
[Guest]: have a PhD.
[Guest]: Some pressure I will admit comes from my mother because my father never finished his PhD.
[Guest]: So she's been quite determined that I should at least finish my PhD.
[Guest]: So you know, some of it is also that, but it's just a thing you do.
[Guest]: It's not my main thing, you know, I'm currently doing a PhD.
[Guest]: But in the process, I've written two other books.
[Guest]: And as I said earlier, I could have easily made those my thesis if I wanted a shortcut
[Guest]: out.
[Guest]: But I didn't think of it that way, I didn't think of it strategically.
[Guest]: This is just something I'm doing.
[Guest]: And I think in some ways, you know, it does, I think having that kind of footing in academia
[Guest]: does give you one strength, which is that you learn to theorize better.
[Guest]: When I'm doing, for example, a narrative history, I'm not really contributing in terms of theory.
[Guest]: Whereas being in academia, you also have a certain pressure to come up not just with
[Guest]: original research, but also theorize about a larger point, you know.
[Guest]: So if it's Travancore, for example, it's not just about that incident, say theorize about
[Guest]: kingship and the place of kingship, not just in Indian history, but also in contemporary
[Guest]: politics.
[Guest]: So that kind of theorizing is something that you pick up in academia, and you don't feel
[Guest]: any such need to do that for a regular audience, which I think is a useful skill, because it
[Guest]: gives you some kind of capacity to look at the bigger picture, you know, build a conceptual
[Guest]: base that other people can then develop or argue with or sort of have a debate about,
[Guest]: which is an interesting challenge in its own right.
[Guest]: That happens in a much smaller circle, it's not really for a large audience.
[Guest]: But you know, challenges are interesting.
[Guest]: So I thought, let me just take this off the box, take it as it comes, enjoy the process
[Guest]: while I'm also doing what I really want to do.
[Guest]: And I'm one thing is sure that even if I do a thesis, I'm never going to publish it as
[Guest]: an academic text.
[Guest]: That's not my thing.
[Guest]: I never see myself doing that.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think that that's a trap that academic historians can fall into?
[Amit Varma]: Like you read a work of history then and, and notice it, notice that it's happening
[Amit Varma]: that there's a narrative that they've chosen or a particular ideological viewpoint that
[Amit Varma]: they have to take.
[Amit Varma]: And they've obviously got their own incentives at play within academia.
[Amit Varma]: And they want to fit in there with their peers and, you know, often toe the party line, as
[Amit Varma]: it were.
[Amit Varma]: So do you feel that that affects the doing of history?
[Amit Varma]: And that in some ways, is something that has kind of changed in modern times, where because
[Amit Varma]: of technology, because of perhaps easier access, which I'll ask you about next, there are more
[Amit Varma]: people just liberated to kind of do history.
[Amit Varma]: So is there a problem like that with academic history and why is so much of academic history
[Amit Varma]: kind of unreadable?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's the thing, you know, two parts, I'll give the answer in two parts.
[Guest]: The one thing is academics have their own politics, they have their own ego clashes,
[Guest]: they have their own disputes and very human petty issues with each other.
[Guest]: You know, sometimes it's masked behind a lot of jargon, but in reality, it can come down
[Guest]: to very basic human resentments, it has nothing, like in any other profession, some people
[Guest]: don't get along with each other, some people are resentful of somebody else's success in
[Guest]: some seminar circuit, all of that exists.
[Guest]: And yes, there is a pressure sometimes, for example, to come up with new original terms,
[Guest]: you know, like a new original concept, like something that is pathbreaking, and everyone's
[Guest]: trying to be pathbreaking, which is, demeans the whole point of being pathbreaking, if
[Guest]: everyone's trying to do that everyone's trying to invent a new concept and a new definition
[Guest]: and a new term, you know, contribute to the jargon rather than contribute to the subject
[Guest]: that has its problems.
[Guest]: So there is that in academia, I do agree, there is a certain amount of ideological hesitation
[Guest]: in India sometimes, you know, I wrote an article on the Mapla rebellion for the Hindu, many
[Guest]: people liked it, but many people said no, no, you can't highlight the religious element
[Guest]: of that rebellion in 1921, because it will be used to victimize present day Muslims.
[Guest]: Now, the thing is, I understand, and obviously, one doesn't like to contribute to that kind
[Guest]: of victimization.
[Guest]: But all the same, in the longer term, if you don't talk about it, you're again creating
[Guest]: room for somebody else to misinterpret it.
[Guest]: So a lot of historians will focus just on the economic aspect, they will focus just
[Guest]: on the social aspect, they'll focus on landlordism, feudalism, but they will do everything possible
[Guest]: to studiously avoid religion.
[Guest]: I mean, don't avoid it, acknowledge that it's at least in the room, because there's plenty
[Guest]: of evidence that that is the case.
[Guest]: So the Mapla rebellion is the big event in 1921.
[Guest]: But there were a series of smaller outrages through the 19th century.
[Guest]: And you see that religion does play a role, because all of these people, when they go
[Guest]: out and start the rebellion, there's a whole ritual, they dress in white, they go and take
[Guest]: the blessings of a Muslim cleric.
[Guest]: All of that happens.
[Guest]: When they attack temples, for example, they festoon it and this is a quote, they festoon
[Guest]: one in 1852 with the entrails of a cow.
[Guest]: These things have a religious overtone as well.
[Guest]: There may be economic motivations, that may be the main motivation, but the protest is
[Guest]: articulated and justified through religious ideology.
[Guest]: You stand up to the landlord who's treating you badly in an economic sense, but you justify
[Guest]: standing up in religious language.
[Guest]: So both are true.
[Guest]: All of these elements are part of the same process.
[Guest]: But there is sometimes in India hesitation to highlight the religious.
[Guest]: We all, to some extent, succumb to that because it comes so naturally, anything you read tries
[Guest]: to studiously avoid the religious.
[Guest]: So it's now taken me some time to peel back those layers, to start realizing that hold
[Guest]: on, there's certain issues with this and we do need to acknowledge it.
[Guest]: We talk, for example, Kabir's poetry about Hindus and Muslims being one, but even in
[Guest]: saying that they should be one, you're essentially acknowledging that there's some kind of difference
[Guest]: between the two.
[Guest]: You're aware that there is difference and you're trying to bridge it.
[Guest]: So we have to be aware of that ourselves as well.
[Guest]: We can't highlight just the uniting of the religions and forget that why is he trying
[Guest]: to unite them in the first place?
[Guest]: What is it that is causing him to sort of say, no, let's rise above this?
[Guest]: When we say that kings used religious vocabulary during times of war, true, and they would
[Guest]: have had political reasons, just as politicians today mine religion for political purposes.
[Guest]: But it also means that it has some appeal to somebody and to some sections that are
[Guest]: clearly powerful, because that's why you're using religion, because clearly it's having
[Guest]: some kind of an effect.
[Guest]: So religion has an effect in our society today.
[Guest]: It's possible equally that in the past, at least some sections, some powerful sections
[Guest]: did work within that frame of politics as well.
[Guest]: Again, it's tough because you don't want anybody to be victimized because of this, but also
[Guest]: not talking about it as I think dangerous, because then other people can come and say,
[Guest]: look, all these historians are liars.
[Guest]: All of them are biased.
[Guest]: They're not telling you this.
[Guest]: They're not telling you that.
[Guest]: They're all trying to look the other way, which is dangerous, because that's what creates
[Guest]: the space for fake news and a lot of misreading of history.
[Guest]: Another part of your question, what was the second part of your question?
[Amit Varma]: I said there were two parts I was going to answer.
[Amit Varma]: About whether academic history will gradually become sort of, not become redundant, but
[Guest]: the role will change.
[Guest]: The gatekeeping is falling apart.
[Guest]: Well, yes, that's true, because a lot of material is now much more easily available.
[Guest]: Archives are being digitized very slow, painfully slow in India, but it is happening.
[Guest]: A lot of visual material is being digitized.
[Guest]: The Asiatic Society here in Mumbai, they've got a huge newspaper archive, Times of India
[Guest]: going back to the 19th century.
[Guest]: Wonderful resources are now available just a click away in 12,000 rupees a year, which
[Guest]: isn't too bad.
[Guest]: I mean, it's expensive, but it's not too bad if you're winning it.
[Guest]: It's a one year subscription, so it's not bad at all.
[Guest]: But all the same, I think it's also important, democratizing access is one thing, but also
[Guest]: training people to read that material in the right way also matters.
[Guest]: You can read something and take it at face value, whereas historians are taught to interrogate
[Guest]: the source itself.
[Guest]: They're taught to ask questions of the source itself.
[Guest]: Why is this document in this format?
[Guest]: Why is this document written on this date?
[Guest]: Who's the author?
[Guest]: What language is it written in?
[Guest]: All of these questions come in because you're trained to ask those questions.
[Guest]: If you're not trained and you just go in because the access is there and try to put together
[Guest]: a narrative, there will be certain flaws in it and people can sort of point out holes
[Guest]: in it.
[Guest]: But again, these are issues that will eventually resolve itself.
[Guest]: The world is in a state of flux.
[Guest]: Gatekeeping is generally falling away in all fields, as you said, and therefore in future,
[Guest]: in this interim, there may be some chaos, there may be some confusion, people may not
[Guest]: necessarily do their best work.
[Guest]: But I think eventually, once this becomes the new normal, a new kind of, let's say system
[Guest]: of moderation will fall in place.
[Guest]: And then that will, you know, it will create a kind of balance of its own.
[Guest]: Things have a way of eventually, you know, once the existing system falls apart, a new
[Guest]: balance will eventually form on its own is what I feel at least.
[Amit Varma]: Taking up on what you said earlier about how when you wrote that particular historical
[Amit Varma]: column, people told you, hey, don't do it because it will be used by so and so for such
[Amit Varma]: and such reason.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that that has that kind of tendency that don't interrogate this right
[Amit Varma]: now, don't say this right now, that is not just about truth, but there are, you know,
[Amit Varma]: other issues involved.
[Amit Varma]: I think it has been there for a long time and is there in other ways also, for example,
[Amit Varma]: in science, where you will hear people say that don't talk about innate differences between
[Amit Varma]: men and women, because people might interpret it in a prescriptive way and not a descriptive
[Amit Varma]: way.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: Or people might say, don't just talk about genetic differences, because he eugenics happened
[Amit Varma]: once upon a time, and because it may be misused in this way.
[Amit Varma]: And just in the context of history, I read an episode with Kapil Komireddy, who wrote
[Amit Varma]: the book, the provocative book, Malevolent Republic, an excellent read, where one of
[Amit Varma]: his central points was that historians of the 50s and 60s in India made exactly the
[Amit Varma]: mistake that you're alluding to.
[Amit Varma]: This is his take on things that because they saw that India was fragile, because you cannot
[Amit Varma]: take it for granted that the center will hold and there were all these competing passions
[Amit Varma]: which could be out of place, they felt that it's best to sort of when you write history,
[Amit Varma]: you talk about the Mughals, you talk about all that, you minimize the damage that they
[Amit Varma]: did so that there aren't repercussions in the present time.
[Amit Varma]: And Kapil's point was that this actually had the unintended effect of making things worse.
[Amit Varma]: Because so many people just felt that the elites are not even acknowledging what has
[Amit Varma]: been done to us.
[Amit Varma]: And that has actually worsened the passions that we see in play today.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, the doing of history with this kind of impulse or with any impulse that is
[Amit Varma]: not just about telling the truth, the best way that you can, I mean, obviously, no one
[Amit Varma]: has a monopoly on the truth, but the best way that you can making a good faith effort,
[Amit Varma]: but instead letting these extraneous considerations come in, it can't end well, that was a point
[Amit Varma]: he was making.
[Guest]: So what do you think about that?
[Guest]: I mostly agree with that, with that position.
[Guest]: A lot of the historians of the 50s and 60s, I don't think they did it consciously.
[Guest]: To a great extent, this would just have been the dominant narrative at the time.
[Guest]: And without us even realizing it, the dominant narratives do shape how we think.
[Guest]: It sort of adds a filter in front of our eyes, and we start looking at everything through
[Guest]: that filter.
[Guest]: You know, when the British Empire was in power, you know, a lot of people had sympathy with
[Guest]: India, but they were still broadly thinking within the terms of the empire, they would
[Guest]: still think that, oh, the British still need to be in India to civilize India, but they
[Guest]: could be kinder, they could be nicer.
[Guest]: So that basic filter doesn't move away.
[Guest]: So in the same way, you know, post-independence, partition, secessionist movements, insurgency,
[Guest]: all of this is happening.
[Guest]: So I suppose there was an impulse, almost subconsciously, to try and sort of do something
[Guest]: that is unifying and takes people together, rather than exacerbates differences that are
[Guest]: already there on the ground.
[Guest]: But I think 70 years into independence, if we don't start acting a little more maturely
[Guest]: about these sensitive topics and start sort of talking about them transparently, without
[Guest]: too much hesitation, without too much shame, and things like that, it's not worth it, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: Then what are we ultimately doing?
[Guest]: 70 years have passed, we can take that risk, we can take that gamble, because we're already
[Guest]: seeing why the risks involved in not doing it.
[Guest]: You know, not doing it, as I said, we're creating room for people to peddle rubbish as history.
[Guest]: And to some extent, the blame sits with us itself, because we've not acknowledged these
[Guest]: areas, we've not focused on these areas.
[Guest]: And you know, religion matters to people.
[Guest]: There was that Pew research that came out a couple of months ago, which tells you how
[Guest]: much to this day, religion matters to people.
[Guest]: It reminds me of a quote, in the 18th century, I think there was this one East India Company
[Guest]: official who says that in this country, he's talking in Madras, but he's like, in this
[Guest]: country, when a person makes money, he finds no other way to show it off but to start building
[Guest]: a new temple.
[Guest]: And, you know, it's interesting, because I see the same thing in Kerala, where the Gulf
[Guest]: boom comes in, people have disposable income, they're building big houses, but there's also
[Guest]: this huge boom in renovating old family temples, groves, resuming pujas, astrologers are making
[Guest]: a lot of money, because people do sort of fall back on what they think is traditional
[Guest]: high culture, which they did not perhaps have access to earlier, they do fall back onto
[Guest]: those things.
[Guest]: And it's fascinating that, you know, that 18th century quote, in some ways, fits this
[Guest]: this late 20th century context in Kerala as well.
[Guest]: So it is real, it is, it's not a phenomenon we can play down, religion did have an impact
[Guest]: on people's lives, it could be syncretic, in other cases, it may not be, but we should
[Guest]: be able to have an open conversation about it.
[Guest]: And if it is unpleasant at certain moments, we should still be able to talk about it without
[Guest]: resorting to name calling and immediately sort of branding people on that account.
[Guest]: I think otherwise, it doesn't serve the purpose of history itself.
[Guest]: You know, we were again falling into the same old trap, if you want to break out of the
[Guest]: trap, you also need to learn to have some of these, let's say, uncomfortable conversations
[Guest]: around uncomfortable topics.
[Guest]: If we have it today, 20 years later, it won't be an issue, because we've already dealt with
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: We've already crossed that bridge, instead of avoiding it and sort of, you know, skirting
[Guest]: it, we've already got there.
[Amit Varma]: Except that, you know, the bridge is not being crossed, the bridge is being blown up, there
[Amit Varma]: is a war in the middle of the bridge.
[Amit Varma]: What we kind of see nowadays is this narrative warfare that actually doesn't have any regard
[Amit Varma]: for the truth.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't matter what happened, what archives you can go into and how rigorous you can get.
[Amit Varma]: It's all about what narrative you can sell better.
[Amit Varma]: And the necessary thing about all these narratives is that they are necessarily simplistic.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the cliches on my show is how I keep quoting Whitman and that whole,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people contain multitudes kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is that they do, that's what good history brings out.
[Amit Varma]: That is, in fact, the very thing that False Allies aims to do, to kind of beat back a
[Amit Varma]: simple narrative and show different layers of it and it succeeds so well in doing that.
[Amit Varma]: But if anything, I think the tendency of the times is to ignore that, like from what I
[Amit Varma]: remember just 15 years back, you could read more nuanced pieces about Nehru than you can
[Amit Varma]: today.
[Amit Varma]: Today, you can't.
[Amit Varma]: Today, he's either a demon who destroyed India and is responsible for, you know, everything
[Amit Varma]: that happens today, including Amit Shah getting acidity on a Wednesday afternoon, or he's
[Amit Varma]: a saint who did nothing wrong and who built this great modern India that the barbarians
[Amit Varma]: are going to take down.
[Amit Varma]: And these are both nonsensical narratives.
[Amit Varma]: He was deeply complex.
[Amit Varma]: He did great things.
[Amit Varma]: He messed up in various areas.
[Amit Varma]: But it seems that the space for those kinds of nuanced narratives is kind of going down.
[Amit Varma]: And I won't even say to throw an additional thought there.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think the appetite for those nuanced narratives is going down.
[Amit Varma]: I just think that the vocal minorities kind of shout out the silent majorities.
[Amit Varma]: So even someone writing about it today will be more inclined to cater to one side or the
[Amit Varma]: other, especially if they've kind of joined the camp.
[Amit Varma]: And I've not in the specific context of Nehru, but in some other context, I've forgotten.
[Amit Varma]: I've had the argument made to me that I know that X is a more complex subject, but I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to write about it in this particular way, because otherwise the other side will,
[Amit Varma]: you know, pick up on whatever the exact same thing that you said about the Maplar Rebellion.
[Amit Varma]: So what's kind of your take on that?
[Amit Varma]: Because at one level, I feel hopeful that anybody can do history, that the gatekeepers
[Amit Varma]: are kind of gone, anyone can dig in for their own research.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you would imagine that in this marketplace of ideas, the truth will eventually
[Amit Varma]: prevail, that quality will rise to the surface.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, we are so dominated by simple narratives that people are actually
[Amit Varma]: becoming scared to say nuanced things, because they'll get attacked from both sides.
[Guest]: That's true.
[Guest]: And I think the important word or the term you used is that vocal minority.
[Guest]: I think a lot of this happens on social media.
[Guest]: In my personal experience, I speak at a lot of colleges, not all of them are in your big
[Guest]: cities.
[Guest]: In Kerala, for example, I've spoken at fairly smallish colleges and towns.
[Guest]: And you know, yesterday, I had a session with students at Loyola College in Chennai.
[Guest]: You speak to students in those contexts, and you realize actually, there is a huge appetite
[Guest]: for nuanced history.
[Guest]: People don't get upset if you talk about things, which are even uncomfortable, people, especially
[Guest]: kids, they're willing to listen to you, they're willing to entertain an argument, even if
[Guest]: it seems unsavory, even if it goes against a seemingly dominant ideology.
[Guest]: A lot of the noise happens on social media.
[Guest]: And I think the tragedy is that that social media noise has somehow started translating
[Guest]: to newspaper clout and press clout and generally, other areas also where these subjects are
[Guest]: discussed at a lot of top level, which is tragic, because on the ground, that's still
[Guest]: not the case, you know, at least in my experience, lit fests, other contexts, if you're physically
[Guest]: in a room with, say, 100-200 young people, it is not the response you would get for saying
[Guest]: the same thing on social media, which to me gives me a great deal of optimism.
[Guest]: As you said, silent vocal minorities can often change the course of history, they can often
[Guest]: wield disproportionate influence, so it's dangerous.
[Guest]: But I think it's important also for some of us to keep our head down, focus on what we're
[Guest]: supposed to do, and not immediately get drawn into these debates.
[Guest]: I use Twitter very little, I just retweet things constantly.
[Guest]: I don't air opinions, I'm not posting things, even when some rubbish comes up, I'm not the
[Guest]: one who, if somebody else points out holes in it, I may retweet it, but I don't personally
[Guest]: go out and do it, because I've got my job, my task cut out for me, and I want to focus
[Guest]: on that.
[Guest]: Because if one tries to do everything all at once, one tries to fight all these battles
[Guest]: at all fronts, it's going to be a losing process, and it's going to be a very frustrating process.
[Guest]: And I don't want to do that to myself to begin with, and I want to focus on one area where
[Guest]: I can do something well, play to my strengths, and make a contribution that will hopefully
[Guest]: last.
[Guest]: It may be an idealistic way of thinking, but I think it has some meaning, perhaps not in
[Guest]: the short term, but I think in the medium and long term, people eventually, fake news,
[Guest]: all the saturation of noise, etc, everything has a shelf life.
[Guest]: When that shelf life comes to an end, when people have finally had it, they will eventually
[Guest]: come back to the books, to the bookshelf, and pick up things.
[Guest]: And I would rather try and contribute to filling that bookshelf, even if it's a less glamorous
[Guest]: task for the next 10 years, but I think that in the long term is a better cause to follow
[Guest]: than get into these debates, into this online noise and these online battles, online is
[Guest]: going to be noisy, it's going to be about these battles, every day, somebody is going
[Guest]: to invent a new controversy, I'm not prepared to play that game, I'm going to play the game
[Guest]: on my terms.
[Guest]: And I will wait for the day that the terms in general also change and then hopefully
[Guest]: then people like me will be in a position of strength because we've put in the hours
[Guest]: and taken those years of sort of effort to try and contribute something more long lasting,
[Guest]: you know, and not so transient as an online debate that happened one Friday and next Friday
[Guest]: it's a new thing, and the next month something else comes up, you know, it's a completely
[Guest]: different set of things.
[Guest]: I'm not, I'm not playing that game, because that game is skewed anyway.
[Guest]: It's skewed towards a certain set of people, you're always on the defensive, you're always
[Guest]: trying to sort of show why something else is not what it is, what people are claiming
[Guest]: it is.
[Guest]: I would rather proactively make that case.
[Guest]: It may not be in a tweet, it may be in a 500 page book, but to me, it seems like the most
[Guest]: sensible thing to do with my time and energy, rather than flittering it away with in these
[Amit Varma]: things.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, very wise words.
[Amit Varma]: I wish I could spend less time on social media.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost like you're a social media celebrity.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, it's, it's with a perverse fascination that I keep going to Twitter and doom scrolling
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's fairly toxic even for me.
[Amit Varma]: One of the mistakes I think I made when I was a young man and which I tell my writing
[Amit Varma]: students today not to do, is of thinking of life or even writing or whatever one does,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of goals, in terms of things to do, you know, rather than in terms of processes
[Amit Varma]: in terms of, you know, what you want to be.
[Amit Varma]: So now, if I can throw that back at you, when you started the ivory throne, I'm assuming
[Amit Varma]: at some level, it was about I want to write this book, and it is going to be very enjoyable
[Amit Varma]: for me.
[Amit Varma]: And it is a goal.
[Amit Varma]: But in the course somewhere along the way, I'm assuming that it became less about what
[Amit Varma]: you are doing, but more about what you are.
[Amit Varma]: So is there a point where you feel that you just define yourself as I am a person who
[Amit Varma]: does history, and then whatever else happens, various books that you've written, and all
[Amit Varma]: the columns that you write, and all of that kind of happens by the way, but you have kind
[Amit Varma]: of come to a firmer definition of who you are.
[Amit Varma]: Because to me, I think people who get that kind of notion of what they are, that consciousness,
[Amit Varma]: I am this, I am happy doing this, you know, I wake up every morning looking forward to
[Amit Varma]: doing this, and I get to do this, which is such great fortune and great privilege.
[Amit Varma]: So do you feel that happened to you along the way, or were you clear from the start
[Guest]: that I love doing this?
[Guest]: No, I wasn't clear from the start, I knew I wanted to do that one book, I knew I wanted
[Guest]: to tell the story of Sethu Lakshmibai, because injustice had been done to her in historical
[Guest]: terms, that person deserved a better sort of reading from a historian.
[Guest]: So that was very clear in my mind, but there was no long term plan, I knew I could write,
[Guest]: I enjoyed writing and all of that.
[Guest]: But frankly, my interest in those days was foreign policy.
[Guest]: In fact, I still keep one toe in that field, I still go for these conferences, and international
[Guest]: seminars and all that on that.
[Guest]: But it's a very small part of my life now.
[Guest]: At that time, that is what interested me.
[Guest]: That's why I went and worked with Shashi Tharoor in Parliament, because he had just come back
[Guest]: from the UN, and he was head of the Foreign Affairs Committee, all of that.
[Guest]: So I went and worked with a member of the House of Lords.
[Guest]: All of that was part of that, what I thought would be my professional trajectory.
[Guest]: Then Ivory Throne happened, it was a six year process, it changed me, you know, people congratulate
[Guest]: me on the book, but frankly, I owe the book a great deal, because it, in some ways taught
[Guest]: me who I am, and had a huge impact in shaping the kind of person I became.
[Guest]: And that then, and I think, I mean, this is probably immodest to say, but success, I think
[Guest]: often helps, which is that the book did so well, and it had such a tremendous response
[Guest]: from so many people.
[Guest]: It gives you the confidence then to start thinking, oh, wow, okay, hold on, maybe I
[Guest]: can take this up as something, I enjoy doing it.
[Guest]: Why didn't I even think of it as a career option?
[Guest]: Because nobody tells you being a writer or being a historian is a career option.
[Guest]: So then that sort of gave me pause, and I decided, let me see if I can, you know, make
[Guest]: this work.
[Guest]: And since then, as of now, I've managed to make it work.
[Guest]: And yeah, now I'm quite content with where I am.
[Guest]: I'm enjoying what I'm doing.
[Guest]: You asked me earlier, why I don't start a podcast of my own, partly for this reason.
[Guest]: You know, one may be tempted to do several things.
[Guest]: But if there is something one already enjoys, and you're good at it, focus on that.
[Guest]: In today's world, it's very easy to be drawn and attracted to lots of things.
[Guest]: I don't want to at the moment, do that, you know, I'm enjoying what I'm doing, writing
[Guest]: the research, the slogging, even the complaining about the research, all of that is part of,
[Guest]: you know, my life now.
[Guest]: And I enjoy that.
[Guest]: It really brightens my overall sort of perspective about things, as opposed to, you know, just
[Guest]: because you may be good at something, then trying that and then trying something else.
[Guest]: That's not my style.
[Guest]: At least I want to focus on what I've clearly decided is my path.
[Guest]: The other thing is, because writing is also in some ways precarious, you know, you may
[Guest]: have several successes, but what if one book doesn't do well, immediately your stock in
[Guest]: the market goes down a little bit, you know, your advances go down a little bit, publishers
[Guest]: take a pause, you know, as to whether they want to necessarily go ahead with you with
[Guest]: the next book.
[Guest]: So some of those fears also exist, which means at some level, I'm also like, I really need
[Guest]: to keep my game up as far as this is concerned, so that I'm in that position of strength where
[Guest]: I can keep doing more and more of what I enjoy.
[Guest]: Whereas if I fritter that energy away, then what if I fall and then it may be tough to
[Guest]: again sort of come back.
[Guest]: So there's some of those practical constraints and fears as well.
[Guest]: So it's not completely all, you know, wonderful colors and perfect, different elements come
[Guest]: into it.
[Guest]: But it's very clear that this is what I want to do.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned that Ivory Throne changed you as a person or it helped you discover
[Amit Varma]: who you were as a person.
[Guest]: Can you elaborate on that a little?
[Guest]: It was a very isolating process because, you know, I started at 19, in your early 20s,
[Guest]: you're still a student, you're still sort of with young people, I've had my fair share
[Guest]: of getting drunk and partying and all of that, I was a very social person in general.
[Guest]: So for me to be chained to a desk for 12 hours at a stretch to sit in a in a in a library
[Guest]: hall in an archive, a room in the archives, for long hours without a single person around
[Guest]: me uttering a word, that kind of thing was initially a challenge, you know, because I'm
[Guest]: not that person, I'm generally quite talkative and all of that.
[Guest]: So it's almost meditative, you're almost, I mean, quite literally with just yourself
[Guest]: and of course, the files, but it also does sort of hold up a mirror to you.
[Guest]: So you, you know, in my early 20s, I would see, you do feel peer pressure, right?
[Guest]: You see your friends, some of them making lots of money in corporate jobs or whatever
[Guest]: their first corporate jobs.
[Guest]: Many of them are traveling, they're partying, they've got these wonderful Facebook photographs
[Guest]: and here I am sitting with my with my parchment and paper and you know, coming back at nine
[Guest]: o'clock and then staying up till three to write.
[Guest]: You do feel a little lonely and isolated, but that isolation also becomes a means for
[Guest]: self reflection, you start figuring out what works for you, what doesn't, what is an issue
[Guest]: for you and what is not and you are also able to surmount a lot of those pressures.
[Guest]: Earlier I might have felt left out that, oh, you know, why am I stuck with this project
[Guest]: while everybody else is having fun, but very quickly I was able to get over it and then
[Guest]: you realize, actually, look, it doesn't matter.
[Guest]: I can go out and have fun on my terms, but the fun doesn't define me.
[Guest]: I decide when I want to go and have fun and then the rest of the time I can equally with
[Guest]: just the same appetite, direct my energy at work and have no issues with it.
[Guest]: So I can go an entire year without socializing with just research and I can go another year
[Guest]: just for socializing, but doing no other serious work.
[Guest]: It's possible because I have control over that process now.
[Guest]: And that control is something I developed when I was working on The Ivory Throne.
[Guest]: For better or worse, it happened when I was very young, in my early twenties, which meant
[Guest]: that at a relatively early age, I had figured out what I wanted to do, how I was as a person,
[Guest]: what my strengths were, what my weaknesses were, what upset me, what made me happy.
[Guest]: Those things all were wrapped up in that book, you know, I've, for example, small things,
[Guest]: I was always a very skinny person and, you know, the one time I put on weight was when
[Guest]: I was doing this book because I was stress eating at this one stage where the book was
[Guest]: simply not moving forward and I was eating and since then I have, I mean, I have an obsession
[Guest]: with cake, but I have to really control myself because even now if it's sugar, I can lose
[Guest]: control very quickly.
[Guest]: And it was in that time that I realized this about myself, that, you know, this, this stress
[Guest]: eating is, is a part of this.
[Guest]: It's obviously a sign that you're depressed in some way and you're trying to sort of fill
[Guest]: that vacuum with as much sugar as you can.
[Guest]: These are all methods of figuring out also who you are.
[Guest]: And it was in some ways enlightening in your early twenties to be able to understand all
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: I've made my share of mistakes and all of that.
[Guest]: I have no regrets, but yeah, it, for me, it was a, it was also a process where I was growing
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: So I wrote the book.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: The book did well.
[Guest]: It got its award and acclaim and all of that, but the book also did play a big role in helping
[Guest]: me figure out who I was.
[Guest]: So as I say, the person who went in at 19 is not the person who emerged at 25.
[Guest]: And that six year gap really was a very meditative, personal, interesting time.
[Amit Varma]: And do you feel that it helped you discover yourself, or do you feel that it actively
[Amit Varma]: shaped you?
[Amit Varma]: Because one of the things that I hold is that what you do shapes you actively, even in terms
[Amit Varma]: of the forms you choose while you're writing, like I'd written an essay on how a simple
[Amit Varma]: thing like the length of a podcast, if you're a podcaster, can end up changing the person
[Amit Varma]: you are.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're doing a three hour podcast, for example, you do way more research, you go
[Amit Varma]: much more deeply, you learn to listen, listening is the most important part of conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas if you're doing a five minute podcast, you don't even have to read the book, you
[Amit Varma]: just ask a couple of stock questions, and you're done, you can stay shallow.
[Amit Varma]: So the form forces a certain kind of content, the content forces a certain kind of behavior.
[Amit Varma]: And then that changes you in the long run, like I definitely think that I'm more open
[Amit Varma]: and a better listener now, after all these years of doing this podcast than I was before.
[Amit Varma]: And I would imagine that is perhaps a similar thing with writing, not just something that
[Amit Varma]: is book length, but something that by the nature of being history and by the nature
[Amit Varma]: of the rigor that that involves, involves your constantly looking deeper peeling back
[Amit Varma]: the layers.
[Amit Varma]: So do you feel that that also played a part like had you done something else?
[Amit Varma]: Do you think you'd be fundamentally a different person like had you become a banker?
[Guest]: Oh, God, can't even imagine that.
[Guest]: The only alternate career I thought of in my teens was architecture, but you know, that
[Amit Varma]: didn't happen anyway.
[Amit Varma]: So I can't be a different person if you think I would have, I think so, I have a feeling
[Guest]: I might have.
[Guest]: Because I think because the first book was also biographical, it was also about trying
[Guest]: to get into the head of this woman who had died so long ago, and occupied a completely
[Guest]: different world.
[Guest]: You're not just peeling back the layers or trying to get into their mind, you're also
[Guest]: learning how to peel back your own layers, you know, so you are also evolving into a
[Guest]: different person that when I say the book changed me, it was partly because I was trying
[Guest]: to get into somebody's head and the methods by which I was trying to do that, I could
[Guest]: also apply to myself.
[Guest]: And I could also start figuring out a lot of things about myself in the process.
[Guest]: So yeah, I think it fundamentally changed me.
[Guest]: I don't think if I was in another line of work, I would be this person, there would
[Guest]: be it would have been another person, another version, that version, that version would
[Guest]: have had its own issues and challenges.
[Guest]: Perhaps there would have been other experiences that would shape that person.
[Guest]: But what happened with this, this book in the first six years of my research was very
[Guest]: unique and very special to tailoring me into this particular avatar.
[Guest]: And I don't think anything else could have done it with that kind of force and, and yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And as far as the craft of writing is concerned, how did that evolve?
[Amit Varma]: Because one of the things that I have pointed out about your previous books and in our previous
[Amit Varma]: conversations is just your storytelling ability.
[Amit Varma]: And some of it of course, comes from the stories, Mad Rampaging Elephants and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: It's just, you know, your history books are as much fun as the Game of Thrones.
[Amit Varma]: But some of it comes from the craft.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that, you know, to get that kind of craft so early is tough.
[Amit Varma]: Because I look back on how I wrote in my 20s, or how so many young people who do my class
[Amit Varma]: kind of write is that they'll overthink it, they'll go overboard, they'll try too hard
[Amit Varma]: to impress others or to convince themselves that wow, I can write.
[Amit Varma]: And there is none of that in your writing.
[Amit Varma]: It's in that sense, you are always lost in the story, you're never noticing the pros
[Amit Varma]: for itself, unless you're also you know, somebody keenly involved in the craft and you're looking
[Amit Varma]: for that.
[Amit Varma]: So how did that evolve?
[Amit Varma]: Were there any models?
[Amit Varma]: You know, were there drafts?
[Amit Varma]: Did you do a first draft and then look at it and say, no, the writing isn't working,
[Guest]: I got to tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: There were drafts.
[Guest]: In fact, the early drafts of the Ivory Throne are frankly embarrassing now, because I was
[Guest]: trying very hard then.
[Guest]: Because at that time, you know, somebody had told me that, oh, you know, it has to be exciting
[Guest]: for the reader.
[Guest]: And I said, Oh, how do I make it exciting for the reader, let me just be very dramatic
[Guest]: and all of that.
[Guest]: Even in the final version, something which may not work for all readers is, I thought
[Guest]: I was being very clever, where I, if you if you've noticed the Ivory Throne, it begins
[Guest]: with a flourish, like there's a lot of archaic language in the start.
[Guest]: And then as the era develops, so you begin in the 19th century, and it ends in 1985.
[Guest]: The language also slowly, let's say, gets more and more modern, more and more contemporary
[Guest]: as the book proceeds, which I was doing as a deliberate thing, thinking that, oh, you
[Guest]: know, it begins in the 19th century, 1860s, Ravi Varma, all of that.
[Guest]: So let me use more antiquated words there and then slowly build up.
[Guest]: But that doesn't mean, you know, I write like that all the time.
[Guest]: You know, somebody asked me, you know, how do you write with such antiquated words all
[Guest]: the time?
[Guest]: And I said, I don't actually write that kind of antiquated language.
[Guest]: So there was some conscious sort of, you know, tailoring of the prose to that extent.
[Guest]: A lot of it just came from reading.
[Guest]: And you know, I think I may have said this in your on your podcast earlier, which is
[Guest]: that fiction and especially Woodhouse had a great impact and in the way I write and
[Guest]: try to sort of, what I think is subtle, but subtly, you know, weave in some humor into
[Guest]: the into the text without necessarily pointing out saying, oh, this is humorous, you know,
[Guest]: this is funny.
[Guest]: I don't have to say this is funny.
[Guest]: It's just the tone sometimes.
[Guest]: It's just your choice of words sometimes.
[Guest]: If you're trying to convey irreverence, you can do it without having to sort of mark it
[Guest]: as irreverence and put a flag there saying that, oh, look, this is the irreverent section.
[Guest]: So fiction, to some extent, did play a role in sort of giving me that general sense of
[Guest]: how I wanted to sound.
[Guest]: This is what people call the writer's voice.
[Guest]: And you know, in my case, the voice was informed a great deal by fiction because I'd read plenty
[Guest]: of nonfiction and there was often a certain dryness, except, for example, Dalrymple's
[Guest]: work.
[Guest]: William Dalrymple was the first person, I think, in India who wrote that kind of accessible,
[Guest]: you know, storytelling format while also being good on research.
[Guest]: And that to me was wonderful because this is exactly how I grew up hearing stories.
[Guest]: This is exactly how I took an interest in the past.
[Guest]: And if I did it, why not others?
[Guest]: So yeah, there was, I would say that, you know, there was some conscious effort to please
[Guest]: in the early drafts.
[Guest]: But then as time passed, and as I got older, it became clear to me that, you know, let's
[Guest]: just focus on telling the story well, and not get so focused on how it sounds to a certain
[Guest]: person or an intended audience.
[Guest]: I was very clear that I wanted the reader to want to turn the pages, you know, you have
[Guest]: to keep the reader in mind, you can't just write to please yourself.
[Guest]: Because that's another trap.
[Guest]: You're writing just to please yourself and you're writing essentially for your mother
[Guest]: and your aunt and your sister.
[Guest]: There's nobody else who's going to read the book and enjoy it.
[Guest]: So to a certain extent, yes, impressing the reader, or rather wooing the reader and persuading
[Guest]: them to turn the pages is important.
[Guest]: But then just tell the story and develop your own style and your own voice.
[Guest]: More than any kind of creative or conscious polishing of the prose.
[Guest]: It really is about figuring out how you want to tell that story and how you have a style
[Guest]: in developing your own special way of doing that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I love many of the touches of humor that come up in your prose and some of it
[Amit Varma]: is of course, because of the content like in previous books, you've discussed mad elephants
[Amit Varma]: being let loose on to punish people.
[Amit Varma]: But in this book, you also have a bit about how they were royals who fornicated with elephants
[Amit Varma]: allegedly.
[Amit Varma]: And I loved your description of Malhar Rai Gaikwad, for example, as quote, textbook dubious,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote, which is such a lovely phrase.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you go on to elaborate upon that.
[Amit Varma]: And there is no textbook where those ways of dubiousness are mentioned, but it's quite
[Amit Varma]: sort of delightful.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about how the subjects are evolving in your head, because you do the ivory throne,
[Amit Varma]: then you do the courtesan book is of course, a collection of your essays, and we had a
[Amit Varma]: great episode on that as well.
[Amit Varma]: And you have, you know, those middle centuries in the Deccan and all of that, which we did
[Amit Varma]: our first episode on, I think, how did you arrive at the subject for False Lies?
[Amit Varma]: And since so much of it is based on Raja Ravi Verma, like in a very loose sense, he is sort
[Amit Varma]: of not the sutradhar per se, but like a sutradhar, he kind of travels through the story.
[Amit Varma]: And in all of these princely states, he's been there, he's painted these people and
[Amit Varma]: all of that, which seemed a very interesting thread.
[Amit Varma]: So was it just sort of a continuation of that early interest into Raja Ravi Verma?
[Amit Varma]: Or did you feel that this theme is something that needs to be tackled?
[Amit Varma]: How did you arrive at this book?
[Amit Varma]: And what else are you working on?
[Amit Varma]: Because you said this is one of two books you're working on simultaneously.
[Guest]: Yes, so, you know, the books that came before this, it's very interesting, Ivory Throne,
[Guest]: I came across a great story.
[Guest]: I was very interested in Kerala history because my family is from Kerala.
[Guest]: So it gave me an opportunity to dig into that and to tell that particular story.
[Guest]: The Deccan book I did because I grew up in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: And here, you know, as I said on your podcast as well, we discuss the Deccan in terms of
[Guest]: the Mughals and the Marathas and we forget that there was a whole five century period
[Guest]: where there were Islamic sultanates in the Deccan.
[Guest]: And I thought, you know, I usually work on the colonial period.
[Guest]: That is my strong point.
[Guest]: I don't work on the early modern period.
[Guest]: I don't read Persian, for example.
[Guest]: So I knew that this was not a core area that I was interested in.
[Guest]: But all the same as somebody who grew up here, all the same as somebody who only found academic
[Guest]: texts on the Deccan, I thought there was a gap that needed to be filled.
[Guest]: Something accessible for people to just go pick up in case they're interested in Deccan
[Guest]: history.
[Guest]: But this was also about challenging myself because the Ivory Throne was such a long book,
[Guest]: 704 pages.
[Guest]: Each chapter was about the length of a master's thesis.
[Guest]: You know, my master's thesis in London was 15,000 words.
[Guest]: And each chapter is between 12 and 20,000 words in that book.
[Guest]: I got very used to having that kind of space.
[Guest]: So it was the career and the life of these Maharanis in the 20th century spread over
[Guest]: 700 pages.
[Guest]: With rebel sultans, I was trying to do the opposite.
[Guest]: Five centuries, you know, sort of compressed into just over 200 pages and the rest is notes.
[Guest]: It was also a way to challenge myself to see if I could do that kind of brisker, faster
[Guest]: sort of broad canvas storytelling.
[Guest]: The book's done well, but what's interesting is people who've read Rebel Sultans have not
[Guest]: necessarily liked Ivory Throne because it's such a big shift for them in style.
[Guest]: People who've read the Ivory Throne first find Rebel Sultans too fast and too brisk
[Guest]: for their comfort.
[Guest]: But for me personally, it wasn't about impressing anybody as such.
[Guest]: It was really about figuring out whether I could do it.
[Guest]: And because the publisher liked it, it ended up getting published.
[Guest]: Same with the collection of essays, because I wanted to see if I could encapsulate something
[Guest]: in 1000 words.
[Guest]: You know, your newspaper column has a fixed space when it's a print column.
[Guest]: In that newspaper, you have that much real estate and you really can't go over your word
[Guest]: limit any week.
[Guest]: So each week trying to sort of condense a story, and obviously there would be strengths
[Guest]: and weaknesses, but just the process of doing that was also a way for me to learn.
[Guest]: And I was getting paid to learn.
[Guest]: So why should I not do it?
[Guest]: So that's how that happened.
[Guest]: The fourth book, False Allies, is partly because, you know, when I was doing the Travenco book,
[Guest]: that's when I realized that this whole cliche of princely states being about elephants,
[Guest]: dancing girls, and the British sort of controlling these rajas is far too simplistic.
[Guest]: Like in Travenco, you know, you have firstly internal palace dynamics, then there's a history
[Guest]: of how the dynasty comes to power and that edifice of power is constructed.
[Guest]: You have local politics, which has nothing to do with the nationalist struggle.
[Guest]: It has nothing to do with what's happening in British India.
[Guest]: It's rooted entirely in local caste, local religious identities, and what people would
[Guest]: call communalism.
[Guest]: And that sort of bubbles up, eventually it results in communism becoming powerful in
[Guest]: that particular region.
[Guest]: It's an internal history, and it's fascinating in its own right.
[Guest]: It's when we say that, you know, history of India in the modern period, the emphasis is
[Guest]: always on British India.
[Guest]: But the princely states covered about 40% of the territory of this country, which means
[Guest]: that what is happening, the micro histories of each of these states is also fascinating.
[Guest]: And Travenco gave me a very in-depth sort of study of that, you know, understanding
[Guest]: what that whole process was and why a single princely state like that could be so fascinating.
[Guest]: And that then, you know, since then, I've wanted to do a princely states book.
[Guest]: I was very keen to do a princely states book.
[Guest]: But then, you know, the Ravi Varma thing happened because I was asked by the Ravi Varma Foundation
[Guest]: in Bangalore to do a coffee table book on him and his journeys in various princely states,
[Guest]: which I did.
[Guest]: It was a private publication that came out last year.
[Guest]: But they read it and they said, oh, you know, you should try and publish this for a general
[Guest]: audience because we found it really interesting.
[Guest]: So then I sort of spruced up the manuscript, made it longer.
[Guest]: This is a 550 page book, even though, again, here, 150 pages are notes, but still.
[Guest]: So I decided that what I would do is 562 states.
[Guest]: You obviously can't choose.
[Guest]: How do you choose from such a large number?
[Guest]: One way is get rid of about 300-odd because when people say that India had 562 states,
[Guest]: there's already a little bit of, let's say, negative thing in that.
[Guest]: Saying, oh, look, so many of them, chota mota rajas everywhere, none of them had any value.
[Guest]: The frank truth is about 300 states were spread over just 6,500 square miles in what is called
[Guest]: Kathiawar.
[Guest]: So you get rid of them, you're down to just about 400 and something states.
[Guest]: The real major states who qualify, frankly, to be called partially sovereign states, as
[Guest]: opposed to zamindaris, jagirs, etc., were just over a hundred states.
[Guest]: So that reduces your options a great deal.
[Guest]: And in that, again, there's variety.
[Guest]: We think of Maharajas as drowning in alcohol, sitting with their dancing girls.
[Guest]: Maharaja of Gondal, who ruled for decades, was a doctor and used to practice as a doctor
[Guest]: in his state.
[Guest]: Ruled over 1,000 square miles, but interesting character.
[Guest]: Maharaja of Kuchin was, you would not find him in the lap of a dancing girl.
[Guest]: He would be poring over his Sanskrit manuscripts, very different kind of character.
[Guest]: But also the bigger states were interesting because there's more happening within these
[Guest]: states.
[Guest]: So a state like Baroda, for example, you have a Maratha royal family ruling over Gujaratis.
[Guest]: The political dynamics in that state are very different because of that natural, to a lot
[Guest]: of the Gujaratis there in Baroda state, it was the Marathas who were the colonizers,
[Guest]: not the East India Company, not the British.
[Guest]: When you refer to an outsider, it is your king.
[Guest]: He's an outside invader who's coming.
[Guest]: So how did that polity and how did its system evolve?
[Guest]: That was one question.
[Guest]: Mysore, you have an aristocracy that is powerful, but numerically very small.
[Guest]: And politics is controlled by the vokaligas and the lingayats.
[Guest]: These are two powerful rural elements, which is still the case in Karnataka.
[Guest]: Even now in Karnataka, Karnataka politics is dominated by these two communities.
[Guest]: And you can actually trace that back into princely Mysore politics as well.
[Guest]: You go to a state like Pudukottai, different set of issues because the ruling caste is
[Guest]: technically a low caste of robbers.
[Guest]: You know, they're a robber caste, the very term kallar means to rob or thieves.
[Guest]: And they're the ones who become kings here.
[Guest]: Dynamics are very different compared to other places.
[Guest]: Rajputana, on the other hand, completely complicated because the king is present and you would
[Guest]: think the king only has to deal with the British, but not true.
[Guest]: The king has subordinate vassal lords who are very autonomous in their own territories.
[Guest]: And he's also trying to fight off their efforts to reduce his power.
[Guest]: So each of these states have almost distinct political structures.
[Guest]: Each of their rulers is dealing with a different set of pressures.
[Guest]: So colonialism and the rajas wasn't just about the British coming, the raja hosting a darbar,
[Guest]: people having parties.
[Guest]: There's a lot of political nuance and intricacy and layers of politics that you can see in
[Guest]: these princely states.
[Guest]: And I was very keen to sort of, you know, do a book on these princely states.
[Guest]: Here, Ravi Varma comes in because this man went, firstly, he's from a princely state.
[Guest]: His sisters-in-law, his granddaughters were rulers of those princely states.
[Guest]: They were part of the royal family.
[Guest]: And then he also traveled through some of these major princely states doing portraits
[Guest]: for the rajas.
[Guest]: So I thought, you take him, follow his career.
[Guest]: So 1860 to say 1880, he's working in Travancore.
[Guest]: In late 1870s, for the first time, he leaves the state and does a portrait commission in
[Guest]: Pudukottai.
[Guest]: So that gives me an opportunity to discuss Pudukottai.
[Guest]: Then 1880s, he comes to Baroda.
[Guest]: So you get a chapter on Baroda.
[Guest]: Then he comes off to Mysore.
[Guest]: So you get a chapter on Mysore.
[Guest]: And shortly before his death, he goes to Udaipur and therefore you have a chapter on Mewar.
[Guest]: 1906, 1901 he goes to Udaipur, 1906 he dies.
[Guest]: And that is it.
[Guest]: You know, it sort of enabled me to weave five states, rather different in their internal
[Guest]: composition, rather different in their internal politics, and try and sort of use him as the
[Guest]: common thread.
[Guest]: In many chapters, he's just a cameo appearance.
[Guest]: He's in the background, he's visiting.
[Guest]: And I'll describe the portrait he's done of the ruler.
[Guest]: But the chapters really are about the states, about the rulers and the states and what's
[Guest]: happening inside these states.
[Guest]: He's merely an excuse to sort of look at those states, otherwise, choosing individual states
[Guest]: and then sort of having a mechanical sort of one chapter per state without necessarily
[Guest]: connecting them.
[Guest]: That didn't appeal to me too much here, he may be a very slender thread, but he's a thread.
[Guest]: So I thought I would I would structure the book that way.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, he kind of appears in things much the way Hitchcock appeared in his films, like
[Amit Varma]: Hitchcock always made these guest appearances in his films.
[Amit Varma]: And there's one film where I think these people are marooned on a boat.
[Amit Varma]: So you wonder how will he make an appearance.
[Amit Varma]: But if I remember correctly, there's a newspaper cutting and his picture is in that.
[Amit Varma]: But of course, all those stories were shaped by Hitchcock here.
[Amit Varma]: I think in many of these cases, Raja Ravi Verma was just kind of a bystander, a bit
[Amit Varma]: player.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, obviously, it is convenient for, you know, the British to paint the Maharajas
[Amit Varma]: as dissolute, because then they can advance a narrative that listen, Indians can't govern
[Amit Varma]: themselves, we have to do it for them.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, it is convenient for the congressmen or the freedom fighters who eventually, you
[Amit Varma]: know, take over independent India to paint them that way, because then they can justify
[Amit Varma]: what in a sense was their own act of colonialism, just getting rid of all the princely states,
[Amit Varma]: using the colonial apparatus which exists to this day of predatory Indian state and
[Amit Varma]: just using that.
[Amit Varma]: There's a convenient narrative for both of them.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what of course you've done is that shown in this book, given glimpses of the multitudes
[Amit Varma]: that are contained within.
[Amit Varma]: But I think the danger for anyone looking at the past, not just a historian, must be
[Amit Varma]: the danger of hindsight that you already know what has happened.
[Amit Varma]: And that can sometimes change the way you look at stuff in the past.
[Amit Varma]: How difficult is it to actually make that imaginative leap, where you actually put yourself
[Amit Varma]: in somebody's eyes, right?
[Amit Varma]: What does the world look like to me?
[Amit Varma]: Like today, we know how history unfolded.
[Amit Varma]: If you're sitting in 1860 in say, Travancore, you haven't heard the word colonialism, the
[Amit Varma]: idea of India, you know, what is it, you know, maybe it's not there for you.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe it's incredibly nebulous.
[Amit Varma]: So is that a shift that you keep making and that you have to remind yourself to make like
[Amit Varma]: I remember, you know, one of the main characters in your book is T Madhava Rao.
[Amit Varma]: And you point out about how, when he was dying, despite his immense eminence and the admiration
[Amit Varma]: he was held in and the great work he did in administrative terms in the princely states
[Amit Varma]: where he was the main administrator and the regard that the Empire held him in.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of his life, he was kind of irrelevant because a modern day radical freedom fighters
[Amit Varma]: who were coming up were like, oh, this guy is a stooge and this guy is like supporting
[Amit Varma]: the Empire and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And even they, you know, even a person sitting in 1890 is not making that imaginative leap
[Amit Varma]: or what the world looked like in 1880.
[Amit Varma]: So from this distance, how hard is it and is that something that you've learned to habitually
[Amit Varma]: do to first construct that contemporary world, so you can see it from their eyes?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you have to keep reminding yourself to do that?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you feel that you've ever fallen into that trap sometimes?
[Guest]: No, this is the thing, right?
[Guest]: So as somebody who gets more and more used to sort of dealing with historical material,
[Guest]: you realize that none of these narratives can be taken for granted.
[Guest]: All these narratives were constructed either by somebody, not one individual, but by a
[Guest]: generation for a certain purpose.
[Guest]: And therefore, that's the logic for the narrative's existence.
[Guest]: But you know, with the princely states, for example, we would often assume that these
[Guest]: were always inevitably going to fail, for example, inevitably, they would have to go,
[Guest]: which is not true.
[Guest]: If you look at the evidence, as late as the 1930s, there was a seat at the table during
[Guest]: the negotiations of the 1935 Government of India Act, which is what the British called
[Guest]: India's constitution in that year.
[Guest]: They had a seat at the table.
[Guest]: There was actually a federal system that was being planned where the princes would be a
[Guest]: part of the political structure.
[Guest]: Go back to the 1860s, nobody would have dreamed that 100 years later, the princes would not
[Guest]: exist.
[Guest]: You know, we now think that, oh, they were feudalistic, they were backward, therefore
[Guest]: nobody, we don't need to respect them.
[Guest]: The frank truth is that in the 1860s and 70s, people did respect them, the nationalists
[Guest]: respected them.
[Guest]: For the nationalists, for example, the British interfering in a princely state and say, toppling
[Guest]: a Maharaja, replacing him by somebody else.
[Guest]: These were not some things the British were supposed to do.
[Guest]: It was a nationalist cause to preserve the autonomy of the states because these were
[Guest]: the final enclaves where the British did not directly affect policy.
[Guest]: You know, it did not directly affect the lives of Indians, it was where Indians were able
[Guest]: to rule.
[Guest]: Dadabhai Naoroji, if you've read Dinyar Patel's book, he was on your show, you know, there's
[Guest]: this quote I've used from his book in this book, which is where Dadabhai Naoroji comes
[Guest]: to Baroda as Diwan, we've never heard of this, we always talk about Dadabhai Naoroji winning
[Guest]: an election to Parliament in Britain, but not that he was a Diwan in a princely state.
[Guest]: And he says that we've not come to serve the man, we've come to serve the cause.
[Guest]: And the cause is precisely this, preserving the autonomy of the princely state, preserving
[Guest]: it from British inroads, because that matters.
[Guest]: It mattered to nationalists.
[Guest]: M.G.
[Guest]: Ranade, when he, if you look at his collected writings, he's got this bit where he talks
[Guest]: about the future Indian Parliament.
[Guest]: And he actually sees it as a house of commons represented by people in British India, and
[Guest]: a house of lords, where the princes and their people are represented, which suggests that
[Guest]: he also saw the princes very much as a legitimate element in Indian politics, not illegitimate.
[Guest]: Gandhiji, as late as the mid 1930s, he was always hesitant to interfere in princely states.
[Guest]: As late as the early mid 1930s, he was saying that, you know, interfering in a princely
[Guest]: state is like interfering in Afghanistan or Sri Lanka, you know, that's not something
[Guest]: the Congress party can do, because we are only focused on British India, where the British
[Guest]: are directly.
[Guest]: The funny thing is, Dadabhai Naoroji won the election in Parliament, and that election
[Guest]: was funded by a lot of Maharajas, you know, they were the ones helping him, because they
[Guest]: had an active interest in having somebody, an Indian, a brown, or as the British, I think
[Guest]: a British politician called him a black man, you know, wanting him in Parliament, because
[Guest]: he, that was their way of sort of giving a poke at the imperial power.
[Guest]: In the late 19th century, and from a good chunk of the early 20th century, the nationalists
[Guest]: and the princes were actually more or less on the same page.
[Guest]: R.C.
[Guest]: Dutt, he was a Congress president, also ended up becoming Diwan of Baroda.
[Guest]: Madhav Rao was, in the early phase, he was part of the Congress process, he was at the
[Guest]: reception committee in Madras, etc.
[Guest]: You know, a number of overlaps existed in this form.
[Guest]: The historian K.M.
[Guest]: Panikkar has written about how it was in the princely states that a whole generation of
[Guest]: talented Indians, they would all join as clerks into the British service, even if they lived
[Guest]: in British India.
[Guest]: And then after a few promotions, they would realize there was a glass ceiling, because
[Guest]: of the color of their skin, they could never go beyond being a sort of glorified secretary.
[Guest]: Your titles may change, but you are always a white man secretary.
[Guest]: Those men who managed to rise above this usually moved to princely states, where they would
[Guest]: become Diwans, where they would become ministers, and thus sort of create not just a career
[Guest]: for themselves, but also a reputation.
[Guest]: And a reputation as Indians governing Indians and doing it well, doing it sometimes at standards
[Guest]: that exceeded those in British India, it gave a lot of Indians pride.
[Guest]: These were heroes of that generation, especially in the 19th century.
[Guest]: You mentioned T. Madhav Rao, he studied in Madras in a British school, he joined the
[Guest]: clerical service of what was then the East India Company, still ruling in India.
[Guest]: But then around 1850, he transfers to Travenco State as a tutor.
[Guest]: Now the local Maharaj in Travenco wants an English tutor, because he knows that in this
[Guest]: new world, in this new colonized sort of space that is India, the English language is extremely
[Guest]: important.
[Guest]: He already speaks English himself, but he wants his nephews also well-trained and well-tutored.
[Guest]: He gets Madhav Rao to come and teach them and become their tutor.
[Guest]: And that, Madhav Rao impresses the Maharaja that he's very soon after given a very high
[Guest]: post in government, just two steps below that of the chief minister.
[Guest]: A few years later, when it comes to finding a new chief minister, there's a local candidate
[Guest]: who's senior, and then there's Madhav Rao.
[Guest]: Madhav Rao wins because he speaks English, he's got lots of friends in Madras.
[Guest]: So he becomes a bridge.
[Guest]: On the one hand, the colonial state is happy with him because he's, you know, what Macaulay
[Guest]: called on the face of it, you know, a man brown in color, but English in tastes and
[Guest]: speaks English well, writes very well, has read everything that the English value as
[Guest]: good literature.
[Guest]: But the Maharaja values him because he can become a good spokesperson for the state.
[Guest]: And that's what he becomes.
[Guest]: He becomes Diwan of the state and starts actively developing the state.
[Guest]: He knows that, how do I prevent British intervention in the state?
[Guest]: They can intervene if revenues are bad, they can intervene if there are social injustices,
[Guest]: they can intervene if there aren't enough roads, public works, schools, let me get all
[Guest]: of these things done.
[Guest]: So you have a huge budget for public works, you start diverting funds into schools, you've
[Guest]: got hundreds of schools being set up in the vernacular languages.
[Guest]: The Maharaja himself transforms the way he dresses.
[Guest]: From your colorful Persianate robes, you start wearing these sober, almost dull and boring
[Guest]: English type clothes because you want to show that you're also an active ruler.
[Guest]: You're not like a puppet or you're not an exhibit who is meant to look exotic.
[Guest]: There was an active effort to show that no, we can actually govern and we can do so far
[Guest]: better than the British.
[Guest]: And you see Madhavrao moving from Travancore, then he ends up in Indore for a while, then
[Guest]: he ends up in Baroda, he lobbies, my friend Rahul Sagar is doing a biography, he told
[Guest]: me, I found out in one of his essays, it's not in my book, where he says that Madhavrao
[Guest]: even lobbied for the Diwanship of Mysore because these were the important big states.
[Guest]: And for him, it was his life's mission to go and improve these states and make successes
[Guest]: of these states.
[Guest]: And for the Rajas, they needed suitably trained Indians, so they didn't need to get the colonial
[Guest]: state involved.
[Guest]: There was this wonderful sort of compact between these two people.
[Guest]: The Indian National Congress, very hesitant for the longest time to discuss the princely
[Guest]: states, partly because the Maharajas were funding them.
[Guest]: You know, in 1887, Viceroy tells the Maharaja, stop funding them.
[Guest]: He tells Mysore, Mysore stops.
[Guest]: But as late as 1901, Sayajirao Gaikwad of Baroda still secretly giving money.
[Guest]: One scholar has written about how even into the late 1920s and 30s, covertly, a lot of
[Guest]: the Maharajas were paying the Congress because they wanted the British to be held to account.
[Guest]: They had an incentive in keeping the British on their toes because they were not passive.
[Guest]: They were not just, they didn't just pretend to be dead and allow the British to do everything
[Guest]: they wanted to them.
[Guest]: They actually did try to fight.
[Guest]: It was not military means, obviously, as rulers of states, it was not satyagraha on the streets
[Guest]: either.
[Guest]: But it was the subtle and rather interesting ways by which they stood up to the British,
[Guest]: sometimes by making statements.
[Guest]: You know, Mysore, when the royal family was returned to the state after 50 years of British
[Guest]: control, it became almost like this cult in Mysore to have industrialization and to sort
[Guest]: of develop the state as an industrial headquarters for India.
[Guest]: By the 1940s, the Maharaja didn't sanction it because he thought it would be a white
[Guest]: elephant.
[Guest]: But Mysore was actively considering setting up a car manufacturing unit because the sort
[Guest]: of technocracy that controlled the state really wanted an Indian princely state in the subcontinent
[Guest]: to become this huge hub of automobile manufacturing.
[Guest]: Because everybody believed, no, no, backward country, poor, brown people, what are they
[Guest]: going to do?
[Guest]: They don't have the scientific and technical prowess.
[Guest]: And Mysore invested a lot of its money, lost a lot of its money, pulling off these industrial
[Guest]: experiments simply to make a political statement.
[Guest]: Many of these ventures didn't turn profits.
[Guest]: The Rajas knew they would never turn profits, you know, for decades they did not bring them
[Guest]: a single penny in terms of, you know, returns.
[Guest]: But they would still pour money into it more and more and more simply because it was important
[Guest]: to the identity of the state as, you know, a very industrial and forward-looking place
[Guest]: as a way of sort of taking the sting out of the British argument that natives were no
[Guest]: good when it came to science and technology.
[Guest]: Each of these states have these very interesting ways of countering the British, sometimes
[Guest]: through ceremony, sometimes through ritual, you know, the way you treat your resident.
[Guest]: And the British sometimes, you know, in their texts and writings, they make it seem as though
[Guest]: these Rajas were too obsessed with ritual, etc. which is not true because the British
[Guest]: were just as obsessed.
[Guest]: So the British would come and fight with the Rajas saying, why have you put my agents,
[Guest]: my representatives chair on the left side, the right has greater honor, it has to be
[Guest]: on the right side.
[Guest]: Then the Raja will fight back saying, no, no, no, the left is always where the chair
[Guest]: has been.
[Guest]: So you can't move to the right.
[Guest]: It's actually a political negotiation.
[Guest]: These are not eccentrics who are fighting over the place of a chair.
[Guest]: The place of the chair has political meaning.
[Guest]: So if the Raja allows this man to come and sit on the right side, he's essentially acknowledging
[Guest]: that person's capacity to not only bully him, but also show publicly that this person has
[Guest]: greater power over the Raja.
[Guest]: So the Raja will insist as far as possible to keep him on the left.
[Guest]: In Hyderabad, the Nizams would not allow the residents to wear shoes in Darbars and the
[Guest]: English found this really insulting because, you know, for them, it was a mark of their
[Guest]: privilege and status to walk into a Darbar with their feet covered, the Nizams wouldn't
[Guest]: allow it.
[Guest]: Two generations this dispute went on.
[Guest]: Eventually they succeeded when there was a little boy on the throne and there was a regent
[Guest]: who was actually ruling.
[Guest]: The regent had some other negotiations with them, a return of territory, other issues.
[Guest]: So he said, okay, fine, we'll let you win here so I can gain something bigger later.
[Guest]: And that's when the British finally get the right to wear shoes in the Nizam's court.
[Guest]: On the face of it, if you write a sort of sexified version of the princely states, haha,
[Guest]: these frivolous people fighting over shoes, but no, it was really politics through ritual.
[Guest]: These small details all had political meaning.
[Guest]: You know, before Bahadur Shah Zafar was, was exiled in 1858, if a viceroy or a governor
[Guest]: general passed Delhi, there was one, I think, forget his name, I think it was Lord Hastings
[Guest]: who didn't, would not go to Delhi because he knew that if he went there, he would have
[Guest]: to go and meet the emperor and he would have to take the supplicant position for formal
[Guest]: purposes.
[Guest]: And he said, no, the East India Company is now supreme, I will not do it.
[Guest]: So he didn't go, but all the same, he didn't want to upset the Mughal emperor.
[Guest]: So he sent him gifts, some carriage or something.
[Guest]: So he was trying to sort of come to a compromise, but the Mughal emperor would insist that
[Guest]: if the governor general came, he would have to take a supplicant position.
[Guest]: The Mughal had no power, but that ritual allowed him that final sort of capacity to make a
[Guest]: political statement.
[Guest]: And so the British were also doing politics through ritual.
[Guest]: They were also very much part of this game.
[Guest]: And so were the nationalists.
[Guest]: You know, when there was this boy, Maharaja of Kulapur, he's a footnote in the book, I
[Guest]: couldn't keep him in the main text.
[Guest]: He ended up being killed by his British warden.
[Guest]: He was beaten to death.
[Guest]: It was quite tragic.
[Guest]: Young boy in his teens.
[Guest]: He even tried to run away at one point because of how much they were trying to control him.
[Guest]: It was a huge issue for the nationalist press, the Kesari, Tilak, you know, all the Maratha
[Guest]: press of Pune, they were all up in arms protesting against his treatment and actively trying
[Guest]: to support Kulapur state because they said that this is not just about a local Maharaja
[Guest]: and him becoming trained by British people or whatever.
[Guest]: It's an issue that matters to all Indians.
[Guest]: When you treat an Indian of this kind of importance, Kulapur is basically Shivaji's descent.
[Guest]: When you treat him poorly, it is a cause for Indians as a whole.
[Guest]: It is not a cause just about one princely state.
[Guest]: And the British were therefore very aware of this and they knew that princely states
[Guest]: could also be used as platforms against them.
[Guest]: So just as in later times, Maharajas would give funding and support to the Congress behind
[Guest]: the scenes, at one point in Baroda, I think in the mid 19th century, you have a situation
[Guest]: where dacoits and raiders would go out from Baroda, rob and sort of attack British territories
[Guest]: in Gujarat.
[Guest]: And as the police chased them, they would come back into Baroda.
[Guest]: Problem being, the British police could not follow them into Baroda.
[Guest]: And the Maharaja would look the other way, pretend he had no idea.
[Guest]: Every now and then, he would catch one or two of the dacoits and hand them over to the
[Guest]: British.
[Guest]: But he actively let that happen because he enjoyed the fact that his people were going
[Guest]: out and giving the British a little bit of a bloody nose every now and then.
[Guest]: In Mysore, as late, you find in 1906 or 1907, a British official complaining that these
[Guest]: papers in Mysore, the royal family, if you criticize the royal family, they will take
[Guest]: you to the cleaners, the Mysore government.
[Guest]: But if you criticize the British government, the Mysore government will pretend nothing
[Guest]: has happened.
[Guest]: They were allowing their local press to criticize the British actively because there the Mahasore
[Guest]: Maharaja had no interest in protecting the British or their sentiments.
[Guest]: Same complaint repeats in the 1920s, which means that for a 15 year period, Mysore Maharaja
[Guest]: is looking the other way, letting his press call the British whatever the names they want.
[Guest]: And there's this wonderful quote where the resident says that, you know, the British
[Guest]: resident says that if these papers were in British India, they would have been long ago
[Guest]: sort of prosecuted into oblivion, but because they're in a princely state, the British can
[Guest]: only request and cajole and add pressure.
[Guest]: But unless the Maharaja issues the orders, nothing can be done.
[Guest]: So these Maharajas were not passive.
[Guest]: The British called them allies, which is where the title of the book is false allies.
[Guest]: You know, they were not necessarily allies in a meek, submissive sense.
[Guest]: They were stuck in this strange political equation.
[Guest]: But the moment the British eye turned in some other direction, they would try to shift.
[Guest]: So these pillars were very shaky.
[Guest]: You know, one moment the weight is on them, it will pretend that it's a very stable pillar.
[Guest]: The moment the British attention moves to some other topic or some other state, these
[Guest]: Rajas will try to see how much room they have to maneuver and try to amend the equation
[Guest]: a little bit.
[Guest]: So they were not passive by any stretch.
[Guest]: They were not necessarily committed to the empire.
[Guest]: The very fact of them funding revolutionaries and anti-British politicians shows that they
[Guest]: were not, you know, they were capable of playing a political game.
[Guest]: They didn't just lie down and take it.
[Guest]: They had their own ways of fighting back as well.
[Amit Varma]: And some did it more overtly than others, like one of the fascinating characters in
[Amit Varma]: your book is Sairaji Rao Third of Baroda, where, you know, he's anti-caste.
[Amit Varma]: He starts supporting the underprivileged with schools and all that.
[Amit Varma]: He funds Ambedkar's education, right?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, whenever he goes abroad, he meets revolutionaries like Taraknath Das,
[Amit Varma]: Madam Kama, Shyamji Krishna Verma, no relative of either mine or Raja Ravi Verma, who founded
[Amit Varma]: the famous India House in London from, you know, which Savarkar was a part of and pretty
[Amit Varma]: radical bunch.
[Amit Varma]: And Sri Aurobindo was his aide for a while.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing that sort of strikes me is that fighting the British can happen both
[Amit Varma]: in overt ways and more subversive ways, which are kind of under the surface, like you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out when Dadaji Narubhai was for a very brief while, the Diwan in Baroda, where so much
[Amit Varma]: was happening.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, the Maharaja didn't like him, the resident didn't like him and allegedly
[Amit Varma]: the Maharaja tried to poison the resident and later got convicted for that.
[Amit Varma]: And it was full on drama, which I think I discussed in my episode with Dinyar.
[Amit Varma]: But he's very clear that this is for the cause, not for the man, as you've quoted him saying.
[Amit Varma]: And he's very clear that if we show that Indians can govern themselves, then the biggest raison
[Amit Varma]: d'etre for the British to be here, kind of goes away, punctured.
[Amit Varma]: And there are other people like Madhava Rao who are not saying that, their rhetoric isn't
[Amit Varma]: that, but clearly that is what they are doing.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it's sort of a dilemma for the British also in a sense, right?
[Amit Varma]: Like one, the British need the good administration for the revenues, because they're bleeding
[Amit Varma]: the country dry.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, they also want a reason to sort of keep control and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: How does this sort of rhetoric evolve over the years?
[Amit Varma]: Because even right down to the 1930s and 1940s, if you look at sort of Churchill's utterances
[Amit Varma]: on how, you know, Indians are effectively brutes who can't govern themselves, and this
[Amit Varma]: will be a country riven by caste and torn apart and the British are required.
[Amit Varma]: How is that narrative kind of shifting?
[Amit Varma]: And is there a realisation that, hey, this is just BS, like within the company, as it
[Amit Varma]: were, within the British Empire, I mean, there are multitudes there also, right?
[Amit Varma]: Not everybody is your officer in Lagaan.
[Guest]: So what sense did you get of that?
[Guest]: That's the thing.
[Guest]: You see, there are lots of British officers who actually celebrate these native statesmen
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: They're called native statesmen because, in quotes, because that's what they were called
[Guest]: in the 19th century, statesmen could only be white.
[Guest]: So if you were a brown statesman, you were called a native statesman.
[Guest]: It's a loaded term, but I use it in the book because it belongs to that period.
[Guest]: So you know, there were some of them, for example, there's this character I discussed
[Guest]: called Shesha Yashastri, you know, on the one hand, trained in an English school, very
[Guest]: good at sort of, you know, rising up the British bureaucracy, hits of ceiling himself, you
[Guest]: know, is treated poorly, not given the same salary, has to fight certain battles.
[Guest]: And till then, he's relatively obedient, you know, he will stand up for himself, but
[Guest]: he's not really talking about the wider Indian sort of cause.
[Guest]: But then he becomes Diwan of Travancore, and suddenly his tone towards the British changes.
[Guest]: So when they send him to Travancore to become Diwan, they think they've got a loyal man
[Guest]: who knows them, and therefore will be a wonderful bridge with the Raja there.
[Guest]: The Raja, of course, has his interests, which is that I don't want you to be loyal to them.
[Guest]: I want you to obey everything I will say.
[Guest]: Shesha Yashastri has his own agenda, which is he wants the Raja to become a constitutional
[Guest]: ruler and sort of develop the politics and the structure of the state.
[Guest]: But all the same, he's also a Brahmin Hindu.
[Guest]: So he's just as interested in the state's temple activities.
[Guest]: So the British say, you know, these temples are costing too much, there is a drain on
[Guest]: the exchequer.
[Guest]: He says, no, this is a princely state, there is a Maharaja, there is a state temple, there
[Guest]: are so many temples to take care of.
[Guest]: As it's Diwan, I am going to do this because it is also part of my duty.
[Guest]: And he sort of deploys statistics to show that actually the revenue from those temple
[Guest]: lands, which the government takes is far higher than what they spend on maintaining those
[Guest]: temples.
[Guest]: So already there's a slight turn there.
[Guest]: He starts, you know, writing on various British policies, he picks a fight with the British.
[Guest]: They have this rule, which is not written in any of the treaties with the Rajas, but
[Guest]: the British will simply not allow a royal judge to try a white man.
[Guest]: And Shesha Yashastri tries to pick a fight on this count, saying that unless Travenco
[Guest]: as a state gives away that right to the British by treaty, you cannot insist that Travenco
[Guest]: judges cannot try a white man.
[Guest]: They have to come to a compromise where eventually, you know, there's brown as well as white judges
[Guest]: on the bench.
[Guest]: But in the fight itself, you show that this man, even though he was trained in the British
[Guest]: bureaucracy, even though a lot of British bureaucrats loved him and they thought he
[Guest]: would be a very sort of, let's say, friendly figure, even when he moved to the princely
[Guest]: state.
[Guest]: No, once he moved to a home territory where it was brown people in control, brown people
[Guest]: in power, brown people in their element, in their own country, completely in control of
[Guest]: what was happening, his tone immediately shifted.
[Guest]: And that essentially suggests that it was always there within.
[Guest]: It just got an opportunity to manifest itself the moment it was released from British control
[Guest]: into what was called native territory.
[Guest]: You mentioned Sayajirao Gaikwad of Baroda, even more fascinating story, you know, and
[Guest]: this is where you realize that even in princely politics, it's not just one group sometimes.
[Guest]: You have at the beginning of the story, you have a Maharaja, Khanderao Gaikwad, he doesn't
[Guest]: have children.
[Guest]: He's got two wives, no children, picks up a 13 year old girl when he's in his late 30s,
[Guest]: approaching 40, marries her, lives with her for four years, no children.
[Guest]: The moment he dies, his brother, who's been locked up already for being a slightly textbook
[Guest]: dubious character, Malhar Rao, he becomes the Maharaja.
[Guest]: But the widow has a strange strategy and this is something the British note in 1884, there's
[Guest]: a gentleman who writes about this, says that Indian Maharanis are very shrewd because any
[Guest]: time there's a disputed succession or there's a ruler who dies without an heir, they will
[Guest]: instantly declare themselves pregnant, by which for nine months at least you have to
[Guest]: defer the succession.
[Guest]: And that opens up a window for different factions in court to realign themselves, change the
[Guest]: political landscape, come to terms and try and hammer out an agreement without the British
[Guest]: gaining too much control over the situation.
[Guest]: In Baroda, the same happens.
[Guest]: The late Maharaja's wife, who's all of 17, suddenly claims she's pregnant.
[Guest]: The brother who's been released hates it because he's like, you know, how can you suddenly
[Guest]: come into this?
[Guest]: I thought this was my party and you're now trying to snatch it from me.
[Guest]: She unfortunately gives birth to a girl and it's fascinating because she moves to the
[Guest]: British residency to give birth because the brother-in-law is trying to poison her.
[Guest]: So she's also countering that by living under the British agent's nose.
[Guest]: She forms an alliance with the British.
[Guest]: So there are different interests at play.
[Guest]: She and the British both dislike the brother.
[Guest]: So in that context, she allies with the British, gets rid of the brother.
[Guest]: I mean, he rules for five years.
[Guest]: This is when Dadabhai Naoroji comes in.
[Guest]: He proves to be a bad character.
[Guest]: The whole story of him attempting to poison the resident is slightly questionable because
[Guest]: he was never actually convicted of that.
[Guest]: The jury was split as far as that was concerned.
[Guest]: But the British have decided we're not going to let him rule anymore.
[Guest]: So after five years, they get rid of him.
[Guest]: Now the Maharani comes back.
[Guest]: She, by the way, during these five years, the complaints that the British use as an
[Guest]: excuse against Malhar Rao to depose him, many of those complaints were sponsored by her.
[Guest]: She would sit in Pune where she had lots of her own money given to her by her late husband.
[Guest]: She would use that money to fund complaints against her brother-in-law in Baroda.
[Guest]: She would use that money to bribe the British resident's own officials.
[Guest]: So even when you say there was a British resident in a state, he was also susceptible to lots
[Guest]: of influences.
[Guest]: That person could also be manipulated in a way where the British resident didn't even
[Guest]: realize he was being manipulated.
[Guest]: In her case, this Maharani Jamnabai was just paying his servants and assistants to keep
[Guest]: fanning his animosity with the Maharaja.
[Guest]: On the other hand, she's getting other people to complain to the resident about the Maharaja.
[Guest]: Altogether she's putting so much pressure on the Maharaja that he ends up blundering
[Guest]: and is eventually kicked off.
[Guest]: Now she and the British ally, they come together and they decide we need to choose a new king
[Guest]: for the throne.
[Guest]: Both have, again, a common interest.
[Guest]: The British want, what they say in one quote, a malleable boy whom they can shape and sort
[Guest]: of make sure he's loyal as he grows up.
[Guest]: She too wants a young boy because then she can retain her control over the boy and essentially
[Guest]: be the person, the power behind the throne.
[Guest]: So there's an older man in his 20s, they exile him, saying that no, no, your claims don't
[Guest]: stand up, we're going to bring in a distant relative, a boy of 12, which is the future
[Guest]: Sayajirao Gaikwad, and my god, this poor chap, Madhavrao also enters the scene.
[Guest]: On the one hand, he's got the British resident on him, he's got a white tutor on him, he's
[Guest]: got this wonderful administrator Madhavrao on him, and he's got the Maharani.
[Guest]: All of them have their own incentives to tutor him and tailor him in a way that fits their
[Guest]: respective purposes.
[Guest]: Madhavrao wants a constitutional ruler, the British want a loyal ruler, Maharani wants
[Guest]: a puppet, a rubber stamp, each of them is putting pressure on him.
[Guest]: When he eventually comes to power in the year 1881, he very quickly shows that none of this
[Guest]: has worked.
[Guest]: He is essentially his own man.
[Guest]: The British, for example, try to impose conditions on him, saying that because the previous Maharaja
[Guest]: was such a bad egg, you're going to have some limitations on your power.
[Guest]: Sayajirao says, fine, you're my overlords, I will accept the limitations, but with a
[Guest]: time limit.
[Guest]: They say, no, no, no, you can get rid of them whenever you want.
[Guest]: He says, no, no, no, I want a clear time limit, two years at most, not beyond that.
[Guest]: A wise decision because they do this in another princely state in Bikaner and the poor chayap
[Guest]: was saddled for nearly a decade with these restrictions on his power.
[Guest]: So Sayajirao managed to show that he would not take things lying down.
[Guest]: Two years into, he picks a fight with the Maharani.
[Guest]: The Maharani starts demanding large sums of money.
[Guest]: He's not obeying her orders.
[Guest]: He's not treating her as if she's the queen of the state or the ruler of the state.
[Guest]: She actually writes to the British and this is a quote from her letter where she says,
[Guest]: he has not till now been listening to you and your orders.
[Guest]: We must put an end to his self-sufficiency.
[Guest]: So she's trying to come back and ally with the British to get rid of this one, or at
[Guest]: least tame him.
[Guest]: This time, for some reason, the British don't support her.
[Guest]: One of the reasons may be that this was a time when Lord Ripon, a very popular pro-Indian
[Guest]: Viceroy was in power, which also tells you about how much individual British officials
[Guest]: and officers could make a difference.
[Guest]: And she's told, no, no, mind your business.
[Guest]: He's going to rule.
[Guest]: And he then becomes this slowly more and more confident.
[Guest]: He's meeting the politicians of Pune, which is Ranade, Gokhale, Tilak.
[Guest]: These are the people he's hanging out with, Jyoti Bafule.
[Guest]: So he's picking up things from them.
[Guest]: He's starting to go abroad.
[Guest]: He's picking up ideas and, you know, forming a vision for his state abroad.
[Guest]: And one thing he realizes very quickly is that the British, when they say an Indian
[Guest]: state should modernize, they essentially want a bad copy of the British model.
[Guest]: They don't want an innovative new copy.
[Guest]: They don't want a system or a version that is rooted in Indian ideas.
[Guest]: They don't want a system that is better than the British.
[Guest]: They want a bad copy that will allow them to say, oh, we're letting the state modernize.
[Guest]: But look, it's not good enough, so we still have to control the state.
[Guest]: They want to have their cake and eat it also.
[Guest]: And he realizes this very quickly.
[Guest]: On the one hand, he's got to deal with this imperial sort of pressure.
[Guest]: But as I said earlier, Baroda also has a situation where you have a Maratha royal family over
[Guest]: Gujaratis.
[Guest]: So there's also that politics.
[Guest]: So you have Gujarati, for example, his Gujarati minister, he appoints a Gujarati minister
[Guest]: for the first time in the state's history.
[Guest]: The minister ties up with the British resident and tries to cut the Maharaja out.
[Guest]: So then he has to get rid of the Gujarati minister and slowly let Gujaratis in at lower
[Guest]: levels so his own position can't be challenged.
[Guest]: And then by the end of the 19th century, you start seeing him flirting much more seriously
[Guest]: with the Congress party, with Congress politicians, funding Naoroji's election, funding other
[Guest]: activities of the Congress, giving speeches that very quickly the British start getting
[Guest]: very uncomfortable about and they think that this is bordering sedition, the kind of things
[Guest]: that he says.
[Guest]: Every speech he will talk about national ideas, he'll use the word national, he'll say we
[Guest]: must have a national culture, a national art, a national government in future.
[Guest]: He's saying things that Maharajas are usually allowed to feel but never allowed to say.
[Guest]: But he's boldly going out and saying these things.
[Guest]: Trying to stop him doesn't work because he's a major Maharaja.
[Guest]: He's delivering good things to his government, his finances are wonderful, there's no debt
[Guest]: in the state, the government's run efficiently, schools are being built, roads are being built.
[Guest]: So you really can't find a corner into which you can force him and make him obey you.
[Guest]: Of course, the straw that finally breaks the camel's back is a good 30 years into his reign,
[Guest]: around 1910.
[Guest]: This is when, in the pan-Indian context, bombs are being thrown, revolutionary activities
[Guest]: are picking up in India.
[Guest]: And there's this time where he's asked to give a speech and he says that, oh yeah, I
[Guest]: don't agree with revolutionary methods.
[Guest]: But he also adds that, you know, the core issue must be addressed, which is what?
[Guest]: British rule, foreign rule.
[Guest]: So he's not completely giving the British what they want.
[Guest]: They try to get him to get his speeches pre-approved and he says, absolutely not.
[Guest]: The future king of England, as air apparent, visits India and he's passing through Baroda
[Guest]: and Maharaja says, no, no, I'm too busy, I have to go to Europe myself, so I'm not staying
[Guest]: around to receive this prince.
[Guest]: He can come, my government will take care of him, which the British don't like.
[Guest]: Finally there's this Viceroy around 1909 or 1910, who's coming to Baroda.
[Guest]: On the way, a bomb is flung at the Viceroy, the Viceroy survives.
[Guest]: He comes to Baroda and he hears graffiti on the wall saying that, you may bring all your
[Guest]: troops and armies here, we will not cease to resist.
[Guest]: This is in a princely state in the Maharaja's capital.
[Guest]: This is written while the Viceroy is present.
[Guest]: And it's very difficult for the British to believe that these things could happen without
[Guest]: the Maharaja, if not actively supporting it, definitely looking the other way.
[Guest]: They have this time where they find that of about 167 seditious, revolutionary propaganda
[Guest]: books that are published in India and which are banned by the British government, 17 have
[Guest]: emerged from Baroda.
[Guest]: And the Maharaja claims, oh, I have no idea, which the British simply don't believe.
[Guest]: At one time, Bombay police raid Baroda, get to two presses and identify these books.
[Guest]: They find a book called Vegetable Medicines, which is actually about bomb making.
[Guest]: And they hold the Maharaja's government to account, but the Maharaja's officials turn
[Guest]: around and say, okay, hold on, before we go into this whole revolutionary thing, on whose
[Guest]: authority have you entered Baroda state?
[Guest]: Who gave you the permission to raid our state?
[Guest]: So your very action is not acceptable.
[Guest]: So first you go back to Bombay.
[Guest]: You had no authority entering and the British are very upset, saying, how can you talk jurisdiction
[Guest]: when we found revolutionary material here?
[Guest]: They say, Maharaja, you must sack these people, appoint a white man as head of your police,
[Guest]: appoint white officials into your government.
[Guest]: Maharaja doesn't sack them, he demotes them.
[Guest]: One of them gets angry and he's not happy being demoted, so he resigns.
[Guest]: Maharaja gives him 10,000 rupees as a gift.
[Guest]: All of these are clear signals to the British, basically telling them to F off, saying that
[Guest]: this is my state, you may be everything else outside, but in my state, I am sovereign and
[Guest]: I will not take things lying down.
[Guest]: Of course, then there's that famous episode of the 1911 Delhi Darbar, where Sairaj Rao
[Guest]: goes to meet the British king, where by accident, it is construed that he insulted the king
[Guest]: by turning his back and not properly bowing to the king.
[Guest]: Some say the greater sin that he committed was that he came there in regular business
[Guest]: attire, which is a usual white hachkan with just a string of pearls, none of his British
[Guest]: titles and robes and medals and all of that.
[Guest]: And they were very upset because when Maharajas came out in Darbar, they were supposed to
[Guest]: look like bejeweled ostriches and peacocks, they were not supposed to look like ordinary
[Guest]: people who could do business, they were supposed to look exotic.
[Guest]: And he refused to play that game.
[Guest]: So then they say, oh, he's not loyal, he must be toppled, either he must abdicate or he
[Guest]: must be deposed.
[Guest]: That pressure finally gets to him and he realises, okay, hold on, I've pushed the British to
[Guest]: the brink so far, but getting deposed is not worth it.
[Guest]: Because if you get deposed, who's going to be put on the throne, they're going to be
[Guest]: beholden to the British for their power.
[Guest]: So they're going to be easy for the British to manipulate.
[Guest]: So he sort of pulls back a little bit.
[Guest]: After that, all his statements which are anti-British are channelled through somebody else.
[Guest]: Usually his Diwan, some official, somebody else.
[Guest]: He will not directly pick a fight, but he will find other ways to get that message put
[Guest]: out.
[Guest]: And then he dies in 1939.
[Guest]: And you know, it's a long reign, a very exciting reign.
[Guest]: He was such an interesting man that at one point, his own Diwan was able to propose a
[Guest]: constitutional form of monarchy to him, saying with full representative government, give
[Guest]: Baroda a constitution and you will then become just a titular monarch.
[Guest]: Sayajirao did not buy it.
[Guest]: He said, no, that's too ambitious.
[Guest]: But the very fact that that proposal could even be made to him is suggestive that he
[Guest]: was a man willing to consider a different kind of future, even within the princely states.
[Guest]: And there's this diary of the Aga Khan, where the Aga Khan recounts a conversation with
[Guest]: Sayajirao, who says that if there's ever an Indian nation, all these princely states will
[Guest]: have to go.
[Guest]: And if you have to become a nation, they will have to go.
[Guest]: So even though he's a prince, even though he's part of that universe, he's aware that
[Guest]: there may be sacrifices coming up for a better future, for a different kind of future.
[Guest]: And he's willing to acknowledge that.
[Guest]: So overall, in this book, he's one of my favorite characters because such a textured, layered
[Guest]: person, he was not much of an original thinker himself.
[Guest]: But he had this knack for surrounding himself with talent, whether it came from the Congress,
[Guest]: whether it came from British services.
[Guest]: The British, for example, were very upset at one time that he was being guided by an
[Guest]: Englishman called Elliot, who was his tutor.
[Guest]: Now, the British liked white men governing and helping brown people, but they had to
[Guest]: be officials.
[Guest]: They had to be part of that official system.
[Guest]: You couldn't get a white friend to come and do it.
[Guest]: That was just as taboo as having brown people run their own affairs.
[Guest]: So this man was fascinating and interesting in a remarkable degree, ruled over Baroda
[Guest]: for a long time.
[Guest]: And because he was so successful at government, it took the British a long time to find an
[Guest]: excuse by which they could finally say that, look, we will depose you.
[Guest]: Otherwise, for decades, he was able to get away with saying the most pointed things and
[Guest]: criticizing them in the sharpest ways and boldly doing things such as supporting revolutionaries,
[Guest]: which people would not dare to do if they were really afraid in those days.
[Guest]: He could do it because he knew he was secure.
[Guest]: But they finally found that one chink in his armor and managed to sort of get him to sober
[Guest]: down a little bit.
[Guest]: But yeah, overall, I think he was perhaps the, of all these princes of that generation,
[Guest]: he was the boldest and the sharpest.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and for all those who think of the Indian princes as capricious or eccentric or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: you know that King George, the fifth incident of the 1911 Darbar, is worth pointing out
[Amit Varma]: what happened here.
[Amit Varma]: The protocol was that each prince one at a time had to go up to the king, bow in a particular
[Amit Varma]: way, then take seven step backwards and then move off.
[Amit Varma]: And he apparently, without taking all seven step backwards, turned his back and that offended
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: So that is not an Indian prince getting offended by the stupid ritual, it's a British king.
[Guest]: But what's also interesting is, there's actually video footage of this, of that 1911 Darbar,
[Guest]: and Sayajirao wasn't the only one to do it.
[Guest]: Baroda, sorry, Mysore and a number of other Maharajas did the same thing, but only Baroda
[Guest]: was targeted because the British had already decided that he was a bad egg and they wanted
[Guest]: to put him in his place.
[Guest]: The video footage shows clearly that nothing Sayajirao did was not done by others.
[Guest]: The other senior princes also acted in similar ways, but they were not targeted because they
[Guest]: didn't have that sort of, you know, the mark on their forehead already.
[Guest]: The British had already decided that this one is somebody we need to put in place.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's like how the Americans got Al Capone for tax evasion, they couldn't get him for
[Guest]: anything else.
[Amit Varma]: So it's kind of like that.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, just reading that chapter of your book, it just feels like it would be such
[Amit Varma]: a great web series and not just for Sayajirao, like even before him, like the craziness of
[Amit Varma]: Malhar Rao Gaikwad, like, I don't want to give too many spoilers, but this is really
[Amit Varma]: fascinating because Malhar Rao Gaikwad's brother Khanderao is on the throne, Malhar Rao is
[Amit Varma]: locked up for trying to poison his brother, then his brother dies, so he automatically
[Amit Varma]: becomes a king.
[Amit Varma]: Now the minister who got him locked up, he sends him to jail, and that fellow dies.
[Amit Varma]: And meanwhile, the things Malhar Rao does is things like just abduct women and take
[Amit Varma]: them into the palace.
[Amit Varma]: Like you use the phrases taken like pigeons and filthy violations being committed on them.
[Amit Varma]: So it's all incredibly colourful.
[Amit Varma]: But eventually, he also falls to this kind of Al Capone tax evasion thing where he has
[Amit Varma]: actually poisoned people and killed people, but he's framed for something he probably
[Guest]: didn't do.
[Guest]: Yeah, which is quite, I mean, it's ironic that that's how it finally, they snatched
[Guest]: the throne from him.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And in the middle of all this, Dadabahu Naoroji landed up for a couple of years and he's like,
[Amit Varma]: what is this?
[Amit Varma]: Where am I?
[Amit Varma]: What is going on?
[Amit Varma]: So we'll take a quick commercial break now.
[Amit Varma]: And although you've spoken at length about this particular chapter of your book, when
[Amit Varma]: we come back from the break, we'll actually start talking about the rest of the book.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty and you love fine art, I have a win-win proposition
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors licenses images of fine art from some of the best contemporary artists
[Amit Varma]: in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches and home decor
[Amit Varma]: items.
[Amit Varma]: You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices and
[Amit Varma]: artists get royalties for every product you buy.
[Amit Varma]: Win-win game.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian Colors new range is in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women
[Amit Varma]: and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta, Manisha
[Amit Varma]: Gherabaswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra and Jaideep Mehrotra.
[Amit Varma]: Stay home, but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not.
[Amit Varma]: You can show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian Colors.
[Amit Varma]: Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to IndianColors.com, that's Colors with an OU, and make art a part of
[Amit Varma]: your life.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: UNSEEN for 15% off at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Manu Pillay about his wonderful book, False Allies.
[Amit Varma]: And let's start talking about the book now.
[Amit Varma]: And you start with this very interesting portrait of Prince Aswathi Tirunal by Raja Ravi Verma.
[Amit Varma]: And it is this kid, he was a teenager, he was 16 at the time.
[Amit Varma]: And he's sitting on this tricycle with these really giant wheels.
[Amit Varma]: But he's wearing European clothes.
[Amit Varma]: And he's got this stern expression on his face.
[Amit Varma]: And none of the kutru monstret you'll expect from royalty.
[Amit Varma]: And there is sort of this sense that not just him, I think you talk about it as something
[Amit Varma]: representative of what a lot of royals were doing at the time wanting to be seen as more
[Amit Varma]: European and less of the sort of the oriental Indian sort of debauched Maharajas dressed
[Amit Varma]: like peacocks and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how that process was taking place, a point at which you kind
[Amit Varma]: of aspire to being like the British like I remember I did an episode recently with Peggy
[Amit Varma]: Mohan on the evolution of languages.
[Amit Varma]: And there at one point, she talks about how, you know, some of Ghalib's poetry, for example,
[Amit Varma]: is not at all intelligible to many people because it's so much more Persianized than
[Amit Varma]: poets of an earlier age or than he was in his regular everyday writing.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a reason for that.
[Amit Varma]: And because he doesn't want it to come so much to the attention of the emperor and so
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: So like language indicates which way the politics of the day is going.
[Amit Varma]: And there is something happening in the 19th century, which, you know, I think persists
[Amit Varma]: with us to this day, that this desire to learn English and to be like the English and all
[Amit Varma]: of that, which, of course, has had a terrible deleterious effect on the way that we use
[Amit Varma]: the English language with all its pomposities and so on, which even the British have thrown
[Amit Varma]: away.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me a little bit about what's going on inside royal heads at this time, that on
[Amit Varma]: one hand, they must be resenting their rulers.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, they're trying to be more like them.
[Guest]: So what's happening?
[Guest]: There's this quote from, I think, a time, Lord Macaulay, I think, who visited one of
[Guest]: the Maharajas of Mysore in the early part of the 19th century, somewhere in the 1830s.
[Guest]: And he says, oh, you know, his house is like that of a vulgar cockney cheese monger.
[Guest]: You know, it's got strange European paintings, random furniture from Europe.
[Guest]: It's just filled with all kinds of things.
[Guest]: And then in the 1850s, with the Travancore Maharaja called Uttaram Dhirnal also, you
[Guest]: have a similar comment where a British official comes and sees his house is full of mirrors,
[Guest]: these objects he's collected from Europe, completely random, no order, nothing.
[Guest]: In another Maharaja's place, they see these, I think, these gas lamps, they used to put
[Guest]: a street lamps or hang on carriages sitting inside his main audience hall as though it
[Guest]: was some grand thing, whereas in England, it was used on carriages.
[Guest]: Now, it would appear that these were comical things and these Rajas were just these idiots
[Guest]: who saw these beautiful trinkets from abroad and their eyes just went wide and they said,
[Guest]: oh, we must have it.
[Guest]: But no, the thing is, for the Rajas also, as far as their subjects were concerned, having
[Guest]: these strange and interesting possessions was a way of reflecting their international
[Guest]: reach.
[Guest]: Saying, look, I've got all these wonderful things, these mirrors and clocks and, you
[Guest]: know, clocks were such a remarkable thing at that time.
[Guest]: So I've got 20 clocks because, you know, I've got so much international reach.
[Guest]: There's the story of a Raja who thinks he's, I think it's called bonbons or something.
[Guest]: He thought he was importing a bunch of things he could eat.
[Guest]: It turned out to be these idhas, you know, wigs that people used to wear in those days,
[Guest]: those powdered wigs, or like this frame that women wore under their gowns.
[Guest]: And he was just taken aback that this is what he had accidentally ordered.
[Guest]: But the Rajas were essentially trying to communicate to their audience that, look, I have international
[Guest]: reach.
[Guest]: The British may look down on it, but the Rajas had their own purpose.
[Guest]: That painting you refer to, it sits in a private house in Trivandrum.
[Guest]: It's this very strange Ravi Orma painting.
[Guest]: That tricycle is, it's one of those giant, it's a royal salvo, Queen Victoria had one
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: This was the rage in the 1870s and 80s, where, you know, bicycles were no longer fashionable.
[Guest]: This is what you had to be on for a few years.
[Guest]: And this guy, by posing on it at the age of 16, he's, frankly, he's passed his matriculation
[Guest]: exam.
[Guest]: Now, princes usually didn't go to college.
[Guest]: He would end up getting a BA degree as well.
[Guest]: And he was actually called the BA prince because he was the first prince in India to get a
[Guest]: college degree.
[Guest]: Now, in not wearing those Indian clothes, in not wearing those embroidered Persianate
[Guest]: robes that the Travancore Maharajas used to wear earlier, he's not just trying to, he's
[Guest]: not deracinated, he's not trying to anglicize himself in the sense that he's ashamed of
[Guest]: what is at home.
[Guest]: The Travancore Maharajas still fed 15,000 Brahmins on state events.
[Guest]: They still had those great ceremonies where they would take a dip in water and come out
[Guest]: out of this Padma Garbha with all kinds of, you know, new status ascribed to themselves.
[Guest]: They would still go to their temple and they would still maintain a lot, spend a lot of
[Guest]: money on temple rituals.
[Guest]: But they would not allow themselves to be treated by the British as just these exotic
[Guest]: exhibits.
[Guest]: So dressing in a dull grey coat, wearing trousers and shoes and posing on a tricycle, which
[Guest]: everybody's posing on in Europe and everybody owns in Europe, is a way of signaling that
[Guest]: I am part of the same cosmopolitan global elite.
[Guest]: I am part of that same thing.
[Guest]: I'm an equal member of the same thing.
[Guest]: I may be brown, but I can also lay claim to that particular, you know, world.
[Guest]: And you cannot look down at me as though I'm just a sort of prop that's here to look pretty
[Guest]: while real men who are white come and actually do the governing of my state.
[Guest]: So he's actually trying to do multiple things all at once.
[Guest]: He's trying to communicate a certain kind of self-image.
[Guest]: There's another portrait I describe in the book but don't have a picture of, unfortunately.
[Guest]: It's a picture with the same Ashwati Tirunel and his older brother.
[Guest]: They're standing near a globe and the globe, you can see America on it.
[Guest]: And there's a book in one of their hands and the book, you can see the text is also about
[Guest]: America.
[Guest]: Why are they posing like that with a book about America and a globe marking America?
[Guest]: They're trying to signal that, look, oh, we're sitting here in India.
[Guest]: We're supposed to be like these backward princes who don't know anything about the world.
[Guest]: But no, through this book, we're actually exploring the world and here my older brother
[Guest]: is showing me on the globe, you know, what I'm reading about America in my book.
[Guest]: It's interesting because if you go back a few decades, there's a painting of Raja Ram Mohan
[Guest]: Roy's son, where it's also a globe, but Ram Mohan Roy's son is actually showing where
[Guest]: Bengal is on that map to a Western audience, like he's pointing out Bengal to a presumably
[Guest]: white audience.
[Guest]: Here the role is reversed.
[Guest]: It is Indians laying claim to the larger world rather than pointing out their home to Europeans.
[Guest]: So these are all forms of sort of defining yourself in a world that is racist, in a world
[Guest]: that is unequal, and in a world that is competitive because you know the color of your skin and
[Guest]: your religion, your language will all be held against you as a weakness.
[Guest]: So on the one hand, celebrating all those things, but on the other hand, superficially
[Guest]: giving yourself this garb, you're also trying to negotiate both those worlds.
[Guest]: You're trying to sort of see how much of a balance you can strike between the two.
[Guest]: And that is what this chap is trying to do and multiple Maharajas try to do.
[Guest]: As I said, Sayajirao Gaikwad dressing in a simple white Ashkan with just a small necklace
[Guest]: around his neck and not all the baubles and all the jewels that Baroda and its royal family
[Guest]: were famous for.
[Guest]: He wouldn't wear that because he also wanted to prove the point that I'm an active ruler.
[Guest]: I am in control.
[Guest]: I'm a working man.
[Guest]: I'm not somebody who sits around on a throne while other people rule for me.
[Guest]: There's this bit in Mysore, for example, I describe how in the early 1900s, when a new
[Guest]: Maharaja grows up and comes to power, an official account with great pride says that the Maharaja
[Guest]: handed 900 files in his first year.
[Guest]: It's a form of saying that, you know, our Maharajas also work.
[Guest]: They're not just sitting in grand palaces and riding elephants, they actually do work.
[Guest]: And the question about whether he actually did work or not, whether the 900 figure is
[Guest]: true or not.
[Guest]: By making that claim, you're essentially signaling that these are active administrators, not
[Guest]: just pretty boys who are sitting there to sort of titillate Westerners and give them
[Guest]: an exotic glimpse of some kind of long lost India.
[Guest]: They were not stuck in the past.
[Guest]: These people were very much part of that late 19th century colonial universe.
[Guest]: They were very much part of that change and they wanted to be on top of that change.
[Guest]: You know, they didn't want to be swept away by change.
[Guest]: This generation was very keen to be on top of that change.
[Guest]: The Maharajas were swept away because of things that happened in the 30s and 40s, not in this
[Guest]: early phase.
[Guest]: And that's why, as I said, a lot of Indians also treated them with respect, a lot of nationalists
[Guest]: treated them with respect precisely because they were also fighting a fight that nationalists
[Guest]: in British India were trying to pull off.
[Amit Varma]: I'm kind of struck by what you said about how some Maharajas like Ravancore would, you
[Amit Varma]: know, feel the necessity to signal to their subjects, as it were, their global citizens
[Amit Varma]: while not caring that the British are actually laughing at them.
[Amit Varma]: So when I started my writing course last year in April, I got a Facebook request from another
[Amit Varma]: guy whose description said writing coach.
[Amit Varma]: So I said, one of my own tribe, let me check out what he does.
[Amit Varma]: And I went on YouTube and he does all these videos where he's basically telling people
[Amit Varma]: to do the exact opposite of what I say, where he is saying that never use a simple word.
[Amit Varma]: For every word, use the most complicated word you can find.
[Amit Varma]: And then he has demonstrations of it.
[Amit Varma]: So instead of say, you should say articulate, opine, utter, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Basically write with the thesaurus.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll teach you all these kind of words.
[Amit Varma]: And I realized that that's not irrational and he got millions of views and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And that's not irrational.
[Amit Varma]: Like as Snigdha Poonam writes in her book Dreamers, and she was also on my show, that
[Amit Varma]: one of the rising industries in all these small towns of India is learning English.
[Amit Varma]: These English coaching institutes.
[Amit Varma]: And what these people are doing is that their aim isn't clear communication or impacting
[Amit Varma]: other people with their writing, as the people who sign up for my course would be aiming
[Amit Varma]: at.
[Amit Varma]: Their aim is to signal to their peers that I'm so sophisticated, which goes back to that
[Amit Varma]: English being that marker of class, that the better your English is, you're signaling to
[Amit Varma]: others where you stand in the social hierarchy.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of fascinating to think that by the mid 19th century, this was already
[Guest]: in play.
[Guest]: At the highest levels.
[Guest]: The other big passion was this, Ashwadya Trinnal and his brother, both were into photography.
[Guest]: And you actually see these Travenco official publications and official accounts where they
[Guest]: say both were great photographers.
[Guest]: They were not great photographers.
[Guest]: It's just that them wielding the camera, wielding this technology from the West and owning it.
[Guest]: You know, Ashwadya Trinnal, his claim to fame as far as photography goes is that he took
[Guest]: a famous portrait of Swami Vivekananda.
[Guest]: But that process of an Indian prince standing behind the camera and taking a photograph
[Guest]: of an Indian icon, there's something, again, it's a signaling, it's a statement that is
[Guest]: being made where Indians can pat each other on the back saying, oh, wow, you know, you've
[Guest]: picked up the camera.
[Guest]: You own a Western technology.
[Guest]: Here you're picking up a Swamiji who's sort of, you know, reforming and sort of redefining
[Guest]: what Hinduism means in this new age.
[Guest]: They're all part of that generation that is trying to own that change and be part of it
[Guest]: and make a political statement.
[Guest]: Of course, these people had their eccentricities, you know, this Malharrao Gaikwad's brother,
[Guest]: he saw a Scottish regiment once and immediately got the Baroda troops to start wearing kilts,
[Guest]: except that he decided to add pink tights to it because they all had brown hairy legs
[Guest]: and he decided, let me put pink tights, add pink tights to their uniform.
[Guest]: So they had their quirks.
[Guest]: But again, to assume that these quirks were just the Maharajas who had them, only they
[Guest]: had these eccentricities is not true.
[Guest]: Lord, I don't mention this in the book, but Lord Curzon, you know, this stiff upper lip,
[Guest]: you know, erect back, very stuffy Viceroy.
[Guest]: He had it in him to play, to go skinny dipping and play lawn tennis, naked ones.
[Guest]: He had affairs with married women as well.
[Guest]: We don't hold it against him because he's a white man.
[Guest]: You know, that's not what they do is just their private life.
[Guest]: That's interesting.
[Guest]: But when an Indian in a position of influence also has, in quotes, an interesting private
[Guest]: life, that becomes a stick by which to beat them and say, ha ha ha, look at these people.
[Guest]: So frivolous, so useless, they're not good political figures, they just, they just care
[Guest]: about their luxury and their, this thing.
[Guest]: That is unfair because then you have to be fair in terms of dishing out criticism for
[Guest]: eccentricities across the board.
[Guest]: Here there's a sort of selectivization where you play on this, which is why, and because
[Guest]: these people, the Maharajas were very aware of the cliches in which they were trapped,
[Guest]: some of these people did make an active effort to try and break out of that, to try and,
[Guest]: you know, look constitutional.
[Guest]: You know, Mysore Maharaja, you know, very gentle figure, Krishnaraja Wadiyar IV, very
[Guest]: gentle figure, did not intervene unnecessarily in politics, let his divans, his ministers
[Guest]: govern for most part.
[Guest]: He would be in control, he would issue policy directions, but he would not soil his hands
[Guest]: with the actual running of the government.
[Guest]: He did try to be this almost constitutional figurehead at the head of the state, uniting
[Guest]: all the factions and trying to build the state and take it forward into some kind of bright
[Guest]: industrial future.
[Guest]: Again, he's also making a political statement.
[Guest]: He may wear a nachkan, he may wear a turban, but he sees himself very much as a man of
[Guest]: modernity.
[Guest]: He doesn't see himself representing some kind of ancient dynasty.
[Guest]: That's why the Mysore Maharajas, you know, they had the traditional Dasara, which is
[Guest]: a kingly Dasara, is a tradition that comes all the way from Vijayanagara.
[Guest]: It's a political symbol that's come down in a traditional way, quote traditional way to
[Guest]: these Maharajas.
[Guest]: But at the same Dasara, they also have an industrial exhibition because they're also
[Guest]: signaling to the world that we are good at industry.
[Guest]: So all the people of Mysore, they'll bring their crafts and their arts and whatever,
[Guest]: they'll have a grand exhibition there.
[Guest]: And the industrial event happening in parallel with Dasara is meant to signal exactly that.
[Guest]: Dasara is the traditional state event, the industrial thing is the modern state event,
[Guest]: and both manage to exist together.
[Guest]: All of these people are therefore, if not successful at trying to sort of negotiate
[Guest]: this, they're aware of it and they're grappling with that.
[Guest]: And therefore, that process of grappling itself shows that they are active political figures.
[Guest]: They're not passive people sitting in enclosed palaces, watching dancing girls and riding
[Guest]: elephants.
[Guest]: They had their elephants.
[Guest]: Mysore had its elephant processions, but it also had its iron and steel works.
[Guest]: It also had its sandalwood oil factory, and it also had dreams of an automobile factory,
[Guest]: which is that both can be carried together into the future.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think Ashwati Tirunal would probably be better remembered as a photographer if
[Amit Varma]: he had one photograph showing Lord Curzon playing lawn tennis naked, which is so fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And you point out how the European view of the royals, at least the view that they're
[Amit Varma]: putting out there in the narrative is so derogatory and so based on these stereotypes, like at
[Amit Varma]: one point you quote the phrase, like a scorpion at the base of a beautiful lily, you know,
[Amit Varma]: implying that's a quote, and you're implying that they don't deserve India.
[Amit Varma]: And at another point, while talking about their view, you say, quote, for the British,
[Amit Varma]: it conveniently infantilized Indian rulers and cemented the claim that natives were simply
[Amit Varma]: capable of serious government.
[Amit Varma]: India's traditional leaders were no good except for frivolous sex and fancy dress, thus justifying
[Amit Varma]: stern manly imperial supervision.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, for a younger crop of nationalists animated by democratic ideals, silken autocracy
[Amit Varma]: was a relic of feudal yesterdays.
[Amit Varma]: India's destiny recovered after a long struggle, could not broke men who played no part in
[Amit Varma]: the battles that mattered, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And your book basically busts these kind of stereotypes.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sense of what is the landscape around this time of princely India, like one of the
[Amit Varma]: sort of things that you've pointed out, which I think many listeners may not realize is
[Amit Varma]: that there isn't British India, there is a British ruled India, and there is an India
[Amit Varma]: ruled India, which is the princely states, which controls 40% of the territory with about
[Amit Varma]: 25% of the population, you know, coming within his bounds.
[Amit Varma]: So now, what is that like?
[Amit Varma]: And what are the arrangements that the British have with them?
[Amit Varma]: Like one very fundamental kind of meta question is, how does the British have so much say
[Amit Varma]: that they are controlling all of these princely states?
[Amit Varma]: Like do they have a powerful army out there, you know, is there a stick?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a carrot?
[Amit Varma]: How has that process kind of evolved that even someone like a Sayajee Rao, who's been
[Amit Varma]: funding all these revolutionaries, you know, is worried about being deposed by them and
[Amit Varma]: just completely chills after that.
[Amit Varma]: So lay out a landscape for me.
[Guest]: Each of these princely states, the way they came into contact with the British would vary.
[Guest]: You know, for example, the state of Pudukottai, its rulers were a recent royal family.
[Guest]: As I said, they came from a caste that was not a caste of kings.
[Guest]: They were considered a robber caste, you know, but they became the system in that particular
[Guest]: region.
[Guest]: And the time when they were transitioning to kingship also happened to be the time when
[Guest]: the East India Company was coming into power.
[Guest]: And the Pudukottai royal family saw an advantage in allying with the East India Company because
[Guest]: it would aid and augment their rise to kingship.
[Guest]: And that is precisely what happened.
[Guest]: With Pudukottai, in fact, Pudukottai did not pay tribute to the British, nothing, nor did
[Guest]: they have a treaty with the British.
[Guest]: There was no paper that was signed between the Raja and the East India Company, you know,
[Guest]: defining what the relationship was.
[Guest]: But because of their respective political, you know, influence and clout, the British
[Guest]: were obviously the superior and the Pudukottai Raja was the inferior.
[Guest]: Gwalior was different.
[Guest]: You know, Gwalior, for example, the Marathas were defeated only in 1818.
[Guest]: We often think that Battle of Plassey means British Empire begun.
[Guest]: Not true.
[Guest]: Battle of Plassey is in Bengal.
[Guest]: By the time the Sikhs are defeated, it's 1849, a whole century passes before the British
[Guest]: have full control of what we call the Indian subcontinent.
[Guest]: It's in that century that a lot of these Maharajas fall into various alliances and
[Guest]: sort of arrangements with the British.
[Guest]: So with Gwalior, for example, they were defeated, they sort of come to terms in the early 19th
[Guest]: century.
[Guest]: But Gwalior, till the 1840s, has a very strong army of 40,000 soldiers.
[Guest]: The British still can't sort of, you know, boss around Gwalior because it has armed troops.
[Guest]: It has foreigners who are training these troops, not British, but people from other countries
[Guest]: in Europe who are training these troops.
[Guest]: Most importantly, Gwalior has a lot of profit coming in from opium sales.
[Guest]: The British want to sort of control opium sales because they've got China and, you know,
[Guest]: the wider history of that.
[Guest]: And Gwalior tries to subvert it.
[Guest]: It says we will find our own market, we will not come into the British system because its
[Guest]: money depends on that and that money is important for maintaining the army and that army gives
[Guest]: Gwalior the teeth to withstand further British encroachment.
[Guest]: Finally, of course, the British, it's in a military action in 1843 that the British take
[Guest]: over Gwalior.
[Guest]: But because it was so late, unlike, for example, in Travancore where the resident was already
[Guest]: bullying the Raja in 1810, because by then the British were in that much control and
[Guest]: they were able to disband the Travancore army, which meant that the Raja had no teeth by
[Guest]: which he could bite them.
[Guest]: Gwalior, because it had teeth till the 1840s, Gwalior actually treated the East India Company
[Guest]: with contempt for the longest time.
[Guest]: You know, when there was this one resident who came in during the regency of this Rani
[Guest]: called Baizabai and when he arrived, he found nobody had been sent out to receive him.
[Guest]: He was treated like any other letter writer, you know, one of these reporters who used
[Guest]: to come from other courts.
[Guest]: He was treated just at that level, not given any importance.
[Guest]: He couldn't even find firewood to light in his kitchen the day he arrived because no
[Guest]: arrangements had been made.
[Guest]: She consciously treated him as a non-entity because she had the power to do it.
[Guest]: Of course, after 1843, when the army is gone and the army is completely smashed, Gwalior
[Guest]: also has to fall into line.
[Guest]: This is not the same, for example, with the Kathiawar states.
[Guest]: The Kathiawar states were those, the 300 odd, hundreds of states spread over a very small
[Guest]: territory.
[Guest]: Many of them the British had no treaties with.
[Guest]: They were paying tribute to one ruler before that.
[Guest]: The British became the next overlord, so the British took the place.
[Guest]: So for them, it was just the overlord changing, not a big deal.
[Guest]: With Rajputana, very complicated because in the early 19th century, you have the British
[Guest]: coming.
[Guest]: They will sign, they all sign their treaties with the British, becoming allies.
[Guest]: Then there's a shift.
[Guest]: Lord Wellesley is replaced by another viceroy, another governor general, who's not interested
[Guest]: in this.
[Guest]: He wants to pull back the East India Company from being mired in too much Indian politics
[Guest]: and all these treaties are abrogated.
[Guest]: Then it's only after 1818 when the Marathas are defeated that the British walk into the
[Guest]: vacuum that the Marathas have left and claim control of the Rajput states.
[Guest]: But here again, the internal Rajput structure is very different.
[Guest]: The British find that because the Rajput states in the Maratha period have been weakened or
[Guest]: the Raja has been weakened, the Raja's subordinate vassals have become very powerful.
[Guest]: So the Rajas have an incentive in allying with the East India Company because the East
[Guest]: India Company soldiers will help the Raja reclaim his power, push back the vassals,
[Guest]: put them back in their place and the Raja can reclaim power.
[Guest]: So it's not as though these Rajas sort of all fell down and sort of prostrated before
[Guest]: the British.
[Guest]: They had various incentives for allying with the British.
[Guest]: Some cases it was forced, Gwalior in 1843.
[Guest]: Some cases the Rajas wanted the British to come because they needed to rescue themselves
[Guest]: from their own subordinates and their own nobles because they were being cornered in
[Guest]: their local political structures.
[Guest]: In some cases like Travancore, Travancore had no option because they needed East India
[Guest]: Company support in the 1790s fighting Tipu Sultan.
[Guest]: That is where they had to sort of get into bed with the British.
[Guest]: Each state therefore has a different reason for allying with the British.
[Guest]: Some may pay tribute, some may not.
[Guest]: Some may have a treaty, some may not.
[Guest]: There's actually no structure to the way the British did this.
[Guest]: Even when they classed, for example, Pudukottai was a princely state, but its original overlord,
[Guest]: the kingdom of Ramnath, was classed as a Zamindari, which is lower than Pudukottai, but even though
[Guest]: the histories of the states are different, where Ramnath is superior, Pudukottai is inferior,
[Guest]: the British sort of topple it and invert it because of various historical contingencies.
[Guest]: So there's lots of things happening in different places and we sort of assume that India as
[Guest]: a political entity was a given, which it was not, which was also why during the 1857 rebellion,
[Guest]: Travancore loudly supported the British and said, we stand loyally with the British.
[Guest]: Not because he cared for the British, the Raja had been facing pressures of annexation
[Guest]: at that time.
[Guest]: He was afraid the British were going to annex his state.
[Guest]: So when they were in a crisis, by loudly proclaiming loyalty, he was basically trying to put them
[Guest]: in a moral position to not annex his state.
[Guest]: Because he had shown that when they were at their lowest and their weakest, he stood with
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: It's a footnote in this book, but Priya Atwal in her book on the Sikhs, she talks about
[Guest]: those few Punjab states that survived, Kapurthala, Patiala, etc.
[Guest]: They signed with the East India Company because they knew Ranjit Singh was becoming too big.
[Guest]: So there's this wonderful quote she says, where one of the Rajas basically says that
[Guest]: my options are, it's a quick death with Ranjit Singh or slow death with the British.
[Guest]: I choose slow death.
[Guest]: So at least I have some more years in power and my state will continue for some more time
[Guest]: in a truncated form, as opposed to being completely wiped out by the Sikh empire of Ranjit Singh.
[Guest]: All of these are calculated decisions.
[Guest]: Each of them has their local, individual reason for allying.
[Guest]: They did not see themselves as part of one unified nation.
[Guest]: That frankly did not exist.
[Guest]: Nationalism was constructed in India.
[Guest]: Perhaps we had what people call a civilizational identity and all that.
[Guest]: But that was not nationalism.
[Guest]: Nationalism was consciously, painfully, painstakingly constructed in the late 19th century.
[Guest]: Before that, all of these people saw themselves as belonging to different regions.
[Guest]: A Travancore Maharaja had no incentive in joining an anti-British rebellion with the
[Guest]: Raja of Banaras, for example.
[Guest]: A Nizam of Hyderabad didn't see why he had to join forces with a Maharaja of Kashmir,
[Guest]: for example.
[Guest]: They saw themselves as legitimate rulers of legitimate, independent political spaces.
[Guest]: Their priority was not fighting for a larger India because that concept of a larger did
[Guest]: not, India did not exist.
[Guest]: Their concept was simply, I will fight to protect my turf.
[Guest]: I will fight to protect my kingdom because I am the legitimate king of this kingdom.
[Guest]: So the terms itself are different and the landscape therefore is this patchy landscape
[Guest]: where you have British territories and then intervening it, you've got lots of princely
[Guest]: territories.
[Guest]: A lot of princely states were not compact.
[Guest]: Baroda, for example, was spread over four or five different parcels of land.
[Guest]: So there was one set of territories around the capital.
[Guest]: Then disconnected from that, there are three other territories because that's how its exchange
[Guest]: with the British took place.
[Guest]: A lot of states in Kathiawad used to pay tribute to Baroda.
[Guest]: The British eventually came in and said, we will collect that tribute for you.
[Guest]: So there was a weird sort of political arrangement there also.
[Guest]: In Rajputana, the Rajput Maharajas paid, many of them paid tribute to the British only based
[Guest]: on the revenue of what was called their core sort of crown territory.
[Guest]: Their vassals territories were not included because the vassals had their own autonomous
[Guest]: rights.
[Guest]: And most importantly, these vassals would often lobby the British for independent recognition
[Guest]: as princely states.
[Guest]: So the Rajas had to also quickly sit with the, if the British resident was sitting with
[Guest]: a danda over the Raja's head, the Raja was sitting with a danda over his vassal's heads
[Guest]: to prevent the vassals from becoming too big.
[Guest]: So there's, you know, each of these states is balancing different things and thinking
[Guest]: very much from a, let's say, I wouldn't say myopic because that assumes that they were
[Guest]: somehow supposed to have a grand vision.
[Guest]: But they were thinking from their respective individual positions which to them were very
[Guest]: legitimate and the people in those days also recognized it as legitimate.
[Amit Varma]: So I have three follow up questions from this, at least three, more might occur.
[Amit Varma]: But the first of them is this, that when you speak of civilizational identity, that there's
[Amit Varma]: a possibility that there might have been a civilizational identity.
[Amit Varma]: Was there one?
[Amit Varma]: What is your sense?
[Amit Varma]: And if so, how would it have been constructed?
[Amit Varma]: Because this is not the age of mass media.
[Amit Varma]: You know, all these states are very different things.
[Amit Varma]: There's not much communication going on.
[Amit Varma]: All these are separate languages.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I assume that there is hardly any interaction or common culture between the
[Amit Varma]: people of Patiala and the people of Travancore, for example.
[Amit Varma]: So do you find a sense of that civilizational identity?
[Amit Varma]: Like one thing that we discussed in the middle episode we did, the second out of the three
[Amit Varma]: episodes we've done so far, is where you spoke about how a lot of modern Hinduism might actually
[Amit Varma]: have ended up being a colonial construct in the sense that the British come to India who
[Amit Varma]: are their early intellectual tutors.
[Amit Varma]: It sees elite Brahmins who sell them on this vision of Brahmanism with the caste system
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And then that becomes a way the British look at India, and they control all the mass media,
[Amit Varma]: and they control the narratives.
[Amit Varma]: And today that becomes a way we look at ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not necessarily the case.
[Amit Varma]: So that is sort of one civilizational view which is playing out among, you know, elite
[Amit Varma]: Brahmins and elite colonial forces.
[Amit Varma]: But is there a broader civilizational identity you feel that is there, or is it all dissipated
[Amit Varma]: and dispersed and different things everywhere and multitudes that eventually move towards
[Amit Varma]: homogeneity but at that time, they don't?
[Amit Varma]: As a historian, how does one even get a sense of this?
[Amit Varma]: Because if someone writes a history of 2021, you have plenty of sources, you know what
[Amit Varma]: everybody thinks because of social media.
[Amit Varma]: How do you get a sense of what it was like then?
[Amit Varma]: And what is your sense?
[Guest]: See, one of the issues with this is also conceptual, which is that some people say Hinduism was
[Guest]: invented by the British.
[Guest]: I wouldn't say the Hindu religion was invented by the British, to say that Hinduism as a
[Guest]: religion was invented by the British basically means, oh, it was only in this time that we
[Guest]: decided we must have a core set of books and a core set of beliefs, etc.
[Guest]: That much is true, that we absorbed the Western definition of what a religion must be, which
[Guest]: means books to chahiye because Christians and Jews, everybody has books, so we must
[Guest]: also find books.
[Guest]: So we've perhaps taken that conceptual bracket, but all the same, that religious identity
[Guest]: sort of existed before that as well.
[Guest]: It was not invented by the British.
[Guest]: The current shape we've given to it was the conceptual bracket came from that particular
[Guest]: period.
[Guest]: But prior to that also, for example, because of the Puranic tradition, for example, a villager
[Guest]: in Patiala and a villager in Travancore may not know much about each other.
[Guest]: Their practice of Hinduism may also be different, but both would have heard the Ramayana, both
[Guest]: would have heard the Mahabharata, and both would not have gone to Kashi, but they would
[Guest]: know that there is such a place as Kashi.
[Guest]: That place exists somewhere in that spiritual landscape, somewhere in that mental map.
[Guest]: You don't even have an idea of what the Indian subcontinent looks like.
[Guest]: Nobody's seen a map.
[Guest]: But you know there is a place called Kashi.
[Guest]: This is broadly the direction in which Kashi lies.
[Guest]: The Patiala guy will also know there is a place called Rameshwaram because he knows
[Guest]: vaguely that there is something there.
[Guest]: So that spiritual landscape is perhaps a common thread that you find, and that is constructed
[Guest]: not through the Vedas, not through some kind of esoteric ideas, but through these wonderful
[Guest]: narratives that is the Puranic tradition.
[Guest]: These stories are basically weaving together different things and sort of giving them a
[Guest]: sort of overarching umbrella.
[Guest]: You know, you're basically saying that all this is true, that's why some of the stories
[Guest]: are sometimes contradictory.
[Guest]: The British read these Puranic texts and they say, there is no consistency, there's no chronology,
[Guest]: why are these stories so chaotic?
[Guest]: You start a story and then you digress into five different stories, then you come back
[Guest]: and again digress into something else.
[Guest]: It's not because it was chaotic or people didn't have structure.
[Guest]: It was because at different times, different elements, different parts of the country were
[Guest]: being woven together into one messy, but one unified narrative fabric.
[Guest]: That fabric still has different threads of different colors, but it is one fabric.
[Guest]: To that extent, yes, I think there was some awareness that there is this broader thing.
[Guest]: And you see that as technology gets better, access to these places becomes stronger.
[Guest]: The biggest set of Brahmins in Banaras, which is in northern India, was from Maharashtra.
[Guest]: Because the Marathas, as they picked up, as they sort of spread out, their armies would
[Guest]: also be accompanied by Brahmins, their armies would also be accompanied by pilgrims.
[Guest]: And it became a way for the Maratha state to flaunt its piety because everybody knew
[Guest]: that Kashi was an important state.
[Guest]: Nobody had seen Kashi, but it was an important city.
[Guest]: So when the Maratha kings and nobles built ghats over there, the current form of Kashi
[Guest]: was largely built in the Maratha period.
[Guest]: When they do that, and they go, even if they say, they go to some place in Tamil Nadu and
[Guest]: say, we renovated Kashi, we built 20 ghats in Kashi, people will understand the importance
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: You know, they may not have been to Kashi, they may not know where Kashi is, but they
[Guest]: know doing this in Kashi is a pious, important thing and therefore they will connect on that
[Guest]: particular plane.
[Guest]: Even so, it's not like the Maratha version of, or Maratha's practice of Hinduism was
[Guest]: what a Bengali would practice, nor that a Maratha invasion, suddenly Bengalis would
[Guest]: all clap saying, welcome your fellow Hindus.
[Guest]: No, on the contrary, when the Marathas invaded Bengal, you have the Maharashtra Puran which
[Guest]: is rather scathing of the Marathas.
[Guest]: They don't see a common element there.
[Guest]: When Puri is taken from the Marathas by the British, the Puri priests actually write a
[Guest]: letter to the East India Company Governor General Lord Wellesley, praising him to the
[Guest]: sky saying, you are the best of all monarchs we've had so far.
[Guest]: So far we couldn't breathe in peace, but you've come, therefore we are, you know, finally
[Guest]: at ease, etc.
[Guest]: Super, you know, superlative language they use for an Englishman.
[Guest]: But there is an awareness, there is knowledge, you know, that these places and these sacred
[Guest]: sites matter.
[Guest]: It's something, that's why even the Marathas, when they come into Orissa for the first time,
[Guest]: they want control of Puri, because controlling Puri not only marks status, it sends a message
[Guest]: out to lots of people.
[Guest]: You know, kings ally themselves with important temples because it has a larger resonance
[Guest]: than his very localized power.
[Guest]: His power may be localized, but by weaving himself to an important site mentioned in
[Guest]: the Puranas, mentioned in traditional accounts, he's also connecting himself to that larger
[Guest]: fabric.
[Guest]: So there is a fabric, but it's not like somebody's given it a shape.
[Guest]: You can't say it's a rectangular fabric or a square fabric with perfect borders.
[Guest]: It's a constantly knitted, constantly being, someone's constantly weaving and adding more
[Guest]: things to it.
[Guest]: In different directions, the fabric is going, growing in different ways, but something exists
[Guest]: and people are aware of that something.
[Guest]: When they say, as I said, when they say that, you know, I've gone to Kashi, that has meaning
[Guest]: no matter where you are in India, that word Kashi represents something.
[Guest]: And if you understand it and the other person also understands it, you're part of that particular
[Guest]: fabric.
[Guest]: So, you know, that is how I would, I would define it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you made the fabric expanding in all directions, no shapes sound like H.P Lovecraft's
[Amit Varma]: Thulu.
[Amit Varma]: Another good reason to control poori, of course, is that if you control poori, sooner or later,
[Amit Varma]: you control aloo.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I had to get my one dad joke out of the way.
[Amit Varma]: I would, of course, never argue with you because zero knowledge, but the only part of what
[Amit Varma]: you said that I feel a little skeptical towards is when you said a person in Patiala would
[Amit Varma]: know where Rameshwaram is.
[Amit Varma]: Dude, a person in Patiala today doesn't know where Rameshwaram is.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're listening to this from Patiala, you're obviously an outlier because you're
[Guest]: listening to this.
[Guest]: No, they wouldn't call it Rameshwaram, they would call it Dakshinakashi, which is, you
[Guest]: know, the southern Kashi.
[Amit Varma]: That's how it's been called.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think so.
[Guest]: If you generally go to, let's say, a person who's, you know, vaguely well versed in these
[Guest]: Puranic things.
[Guest]: Frankly, I shouldn't have said Patiala because Punjab is slightly an outlier in these things,
[Guest]: which is why even the old Brahmins used to include that in what was called Mleccha Desha,
[Guest]: you know, barbarian country, don't even go there.
[Guest]: And caste wasn't as strong as it was in the Gangetic belt.
[Guest]: So maybe that was the wrong example to give.
[Guest]: But still, if you found somebody who would broadly belong to that Hindu tradition, was
[Guest]: not a Sikh, for example, and you said Dakshinakashi, they would understand broadly what you are
[Guest]: referring to.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: The second of my three questions is that maybe there was a sense of a civilizational identity
[Amit Varma]: which was undefined, nebulous, always changing.
[Amit Varma]: When did a sense of a national identity come about?
[Amit Varma]: Because my sense of the princely states, you know, from your writing and those of others
[Amit Varma]: would be that there is no sense of an India per se as we know it now.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's just that I would imagine that a ruler in that time would have his princely
[Amit Varma]: state.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a foreign land, including other princely states.
[Amit Varma]: And then there is this foreign lands, which has suddenly come and the British and that's
[Amit Varma]: what there is.
[Amit Varma]: So when does a national identity start taking shape, where princely states can also think
[Amit Varma]: of the possibility of something called India when they can start using the word national,
[Guest]: for example?
[Guest]: I think it's having the British as a common enemy.
[Guest]: Why is it that the early nationalists who had the toughest task of firstly articulating
[Guest]: what nationalism is, how do you explain or construct nationalism, them and the princes,
[Guest]: the reason they were on the same page in the early decades, the first 50 odd years of that
[Guest]: process was partly because they had a common enemy.
[Guest]: When you have a common enemy, it becomes easier to define what you have in common as brown
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: And I think that helped a great deal.
[Guest]: That's why the early Congress also stayed away from touchy areas that would emphasize
[Guest]: difference.
[Guest]: They didn't want to get into social reform and anything where people would end up quarrelling
[Guest]: with each other.
[Guest]: They just focused strictly on political things they required, for example, the English language,
[Guest]: because otherwise they would all get lost in each other's languages.
[Guest]: So they needed people who were brown, spoke English, had gone to the new schools, agreed
[Guest]: on a core agenda of things to discuss, and together they would then construct nationalism.
[Guest]: The princes joined the party because they said, great, you know, you're also fighting
[Guest]: against the British.
[Guest]: We're also not very happy with the British, so let's sort of come together.
[Guest]: So nationalism occurs, I would say, you know, there's this, some people would put it down
[Guest]: to the 1860s, Dadabhai Naoroji, that generation, but frankly already, if I'm not wrong, was
[Guest]: it the 1840s or the 50s, there's this mysterious, not mysterious, we know the identity now,
[Guest]: but I don't remember the name now.
[Guest]: There was this gentleman who was writing letters to the editor of the Bombay Gazette, this
[Guest]: newspaper in Bombay, and it was fascinating that those, I think it's six or seven letters
[Guest]: that he wrote, but a very strong critique of colonial rule, economic, political, everything.
[Guest]: So I would say somewhere by mid-19th century, there was, you know, the initial sort of shoots
[Guest]: of this were emerging.
[Guest]: Awareness that the British are bad for India, you know, and the thing is this awareness
[Guest]: was also linked to a great extent to English education, not because English education suddenly
[Guest]: enlightened people, but because English education gave us a language and a vocabulary and words
[Guest]: like democracy, nationalism, which we could use to express ideas that were already there.
[Guest]: Those feelings were there.
[Guest]: The English language allowed people to express it in a form that even the colonizer would
[Guest]: understand and people in Britain would understand, and therefore it could become some kind of
[Guest]: a movement.
[Guest]: So the second half of the 19th century really is when people start thinking of India as
[Guest]: a whole, as one unit, and where people need to come together and manage to achieve something.
[Guest]: It was not easy.
[Guest]: The early Congress used to meet once a year, end of the year in December, they would give
[Guest]: speeches and they would go, and the British would laugh at them saying, you know, they're
[Guest]: like a suburban debating club, you know, people come, they give long speeches and everybody
[Guest]: goes home.
[Guest]: But that itself was the beginning of that process, beginning of saying, no, we are all
[Guest]: part of one thing.
[Guest]: We may only meet once a year, but we are part of one political landscape.
[Guest]: So it's really in the late 19th century that this happens, which is why at that time these
[Guest]: people were allies with each other and the British were the common enemy.
[Guest]: Having a common enemy always helps because I think it, even now politicians make this
[Guest]: huge bogey out of Pakistan because it helps sort of rally people together behind them
[Guest]: in India and then sort of takes attention away from problems within by focusing on an
[Guest]: external enemy.
[Guest]: It's not the perfect analogy, but essentially the same principle is in play.
[Guest]: You highlight a foreigner and say that at least we all belong here.
[Guest]: We may not have defined exactly what our places are in this landscape, but we definitely were
[Guest]: born here.
[Guest]: Whereas this person has not only come from outside, he also comes from an alien culture
[Guest]: and is dominating us.
[Guest]: And we know one thing, we may disagree on everything else, but we know one thing, which
[Guest]: is that we want to push back that domination.
[Guest]: So that common cause becomes a medium by which to then think about nationalism, think about
[Guest]: how you have things in common, think about that civilizational element, think about the
[Guest]: religious traditions that bind you together, think about and sort of intellectualize the
[Guest]: argument.
[Guest]: But I think it begins essentially with having a common enemy.
[Amit Varma]: And as a German theorist, Carl Schmitt once said that for politics, you always need an
[Amit Varma]: other.
[Amit Varma]: So I guess this is a convenient other.
[Amit Varma]: Now you speak of that one nation actually coming together and when it actually does
[Amit Varma]: come together after 47, after the British leave, it comes together in a lot of violence.
[Amit Varma]: Like I did an episode with Narayanini Basu on her excellent book on VP Menon.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing that strikes me is that what Sardar Patel and VP Menon do for what we would
[Amit Varma]: consider a good cause today, because it's all over and we are beneficiaries, is an act
[Amit Varma]: of colonialism that is actually harsher and more brutal than the original British act
[Amit Varma]: of colonialism, because they take over control of the princely state.
[Amit Varma]: So they derive their influence in the princely states over a long period of time, whereas
[Amit Varma]: what Patel and Menon do is over a short period of time with a lot of violence, like some,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you've written about how between 27,000 to 40,000 people died in Hyderabad
[Guest]: while that was happening.
[Guest]: Yeah, that so-called police operation actually, I mean, your police operation involved bombs
[Guest]: from aircraft.
[Guest]: I'm sorry, it was not a police operation.
[Unknown]: It was an invasion.
[Unknown]: It was a conquest.
[Guest]: It was a military takeover of the state, which I'm not saying is good or bad, but we should
[Guest]: call it what it was.
[Guest]: Police operation even then was used to play down what exactly it was.
[Amit Varma]: And subsequent broken promises in terms of what, you know, you promise them something,
[Amit Varma]: they sign up on that basis, and then you kind of break that.
[Amit Varma]: So is that something that we should also consider, like when we think of colonialism, we think
[Amit Varma]: of the colonialism of the British, and that's a great evil in the subcontinent.
[Amit Varma]: But what happened in 47 to get the princely states in?
[Amit Varma]: And I am of course glad it happened now that it's over, because I'm glad to be here in,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in an independent India where we can travel freely, I can go to Rameshwaram
[Amit Varma]: or Patiala anytime I feel like, but the manner in which it happened is something that I find
[Amit Varma]: it hard to look at and say that no, that was as evil as colonialism.
[Guest]: What are your thoughts on that?
[Guest]: The thing is, the Maharajas in some way lost sympathy in that final decade before independence.
[Guest]: Till the mid 30s, they were relatively strong.
[Guest]: Nobody could envision an India without them, only perhaps a few socialists in the Congress,
[Guest]: but generally, Gandhi was circumspect.
[Guest]: Patiala, you know, the same Patiala who got them to integrate their states with the Indian
[Guest]: Union in 1929 or so in a speech in Mysore, you know, some of the local politicians complained
[Guest]: about the Mysore government, and Sardar Patiala basically said, this is a great government,
[Guest]: if there's Maharajas, wonderful, if you've got issues with them, the people of Mysore
[Guest]: have a problem, not the ruler, it's your problem, not the ruler's fault, you must have some
[Guest]: issue with you, he's telling the people, the local congressmen in Mysore.
[Guest]: The same Patiala gets them to eventually give up their rights in the states.
[Guest]: Several things of course are at play, one, from their perspective, from the perspective
[Guest]: of the Congress, partitions happened, India can't be allowed to secede, you can't have
[Guest]: these semi-autonomous units in the state, Nehru has an allergy when it comes to these
[Guest]: hereditary rulers, and each of them has their reasons.
[Guest]: So there is an incentive in trying to sort of get a strong state together, for which
[Guest]: all of these little barriers in these states, these islands cannot be allowed.
[Guest]: For the same reason, it's also a sort of implicit recognition that just as the British found
[Guest]: that a princely territory could be used to harbour anti-British dacoits, to harbour seditionists,
[Guest]: to support revolutionaries, I mean it could also easily become a footing for anti-India
[Guest]: forces for example, to use these princely states against the new Congress government
[Guest]: or whatever, or the British to continue to manipulate Indian politics.
[Guest]: They might find ways to sort of control the rajas and thus destabilise India or try to
[Guest]: retain control in India.
[Guest]: The British certainly had a brief moment of flirtation with Travancore because Travancore
[Guest]: had thorium, which they were very interested in, so they were like, should we try and perhaps
[Guest]: give Travancore special treatment?
[Guest]: But there were lots of fears, 1947 is a time of great chaos, nobody is really sure about
[Guest]: where all these pieces are going to land, so you really are going in and you have to
[Guest]: do your best, it's almost on a war footing.
[Guest]: But what really causes the maharajas trouble is the fact that they were increasingly losing
[Guest]: sympathy from their own subjects.
[Guest]: Even the best of them, in states like Mysore, Travancore etc, maharajas lost sympathy ultimately
[Guest]: because of their own success.
[Guest]: On the one hand you build schools etc, but you're stuck in a colonial framework which
[Guest]: puts certain limitations on how many jobs you can give etc etc.
[Guest]: People start getting political, you're on the one hand equipping them to think of democracy
[Guest]: and modern rights and speak that democratic language, but you're a hereditary ruler.
[Guest]: So there's already a slight sort of disjointedness over there.
[Guest]: By the 1930s and 40s, it's becoming very clear that the British are slowly going to have
[Guest]: to leave.
[Guest]: The maharajas are now lost because they're like, which way should we sway?
[Guest]: And they fail to unite.
[Guest]: This is where their quirks come in, in the sense that Hyderabad is too grand to sit with
[Guest]: say a Patiala, which it sees as a minor state.
[Guest]: Travancore will not sit with a Jaipur for example because it thinks its status is higher.
[Guest]: The maharajas do not come together and lobby as a group.
[Guest]: And efforts to get them to lobby as a group fail.
[Guest]: From their perspective too, they are legitimate rulers of these states, they are still stuck
[Guest]: in a place where they do not see India as a nation state.
[Guest]: So C.P.
[Guest]: Ramaswamy, Iyer of Travancore-Diwan goes to Lord Mountbatten and says, this is not going
[Guest]: to last and tells the Maharaja of Travancore, within six months of the British departure
[Guest]: there is going to be civil war in India and after the massacre of the Congress leaders,
[Guest]: you have to decide how you want to behave and what your future will be.
[Guest]: He was convinced there was going to be a massacre of Congress leaders because this was not going
[Guest]: to happen.
[Guest]: The Indian state would not survive.
[Guest]: So many of them were really genuinely caught up in the idea that there could not be some
[Guest]: kind of unified Indian nation and because they saw themselves as legitimate, why should
[Guest]: they sort of give up their powers and sacrifice something for a larger, better together or
[Guest]: even lobby together.
[Guest]: Why should I sit with another Maharaja when in my own right I have that capacity, etc.
[Guest]: So that's one thing.
[Guest]: The other thing is repression.
[Guest]: And this is interesting because we assume that all Indians when they stood up and fought
[Guest]: it was anti-colonial, which is not true.
[Guest]: As I said, in Travancore, Mysore, in Baroda it was anti-Gujarati-Marathi.
[Guest]: In Travancore, it was Nayas versus Irawas versus Syrian Christians.
[Guest]: These were internal politics.
[Guest]: In the 30s, whether you look at Baroda, Mysore, Travancore, any of the big states, there was
[Guest]: an overlap between nationalism and this internal politics.
[Guest]: What happened is the local politicians realized having links with the Congress allowed them
[Guest]: to punch above their weight because the Rajas were sensitive to Congress criticism.
[Guest]: So having a Congress tag was a good way to negotiate with the Raja.
[Guest]: The Congress, especially for example, the local Congress stood for election in Mysore
[Guest]: and they lost.
[Guest]: There was no interest in the Congress's message at that time.
[Guest]: So they realized they need local allies to create a footprint in the states.
[Guest]: So there was a sort of politics of convenience there.
[Guest]: There was a convenient marriage between local politicians and the Congress party.
[Guest]: Local politicians said, let's forget our factionalism and our communalism for now.
[Guest]: Get together under the Congress party and negotiate with the Maharaja for better rights,
[Guest]: for more democratic representation.
[Guest]: So Maharajas were suddenly in a position where outside British India, their overlords whom
[Guest]: they could otherwise manipulate or play some game with, they're being pushed out.
[Guest]: Congress is rising to power.
[Guest]: Local politicians who they so far have been playing are now actually using the Congress's
[Guest]: language and becoming anti-Maharaja.
[Guest]: Till yesterday, the Maharajas are being celebrated by the Congress.
[Guest]: Now however, they've become the villains.
[Guest]: And instinctively, almost all of them, whether it's in Mysore, whether it's in Travancore,
[Guest]: they start having very, very repressive strategies in play, physically sort of attacking people,
[Guest]: guns being fired.
[Guest]: In Viduraswatha, in Mysore, there is what is called the Southern Jallianwala Bagh.
[Guest]: In Travancore, Punnapravaila, after 1810, for the first time in the state, troops being
[Guest]: brought out to attack its own people, bloodshed in the streets.
[Guest]: That kind of thing starts happening in the states and the Maharajas lose sympathy.
[Guest]: And finally, with World War II coming in, the complete global landscape changes.
[Guest]: Now the Maharajas are really small fry.
[Guest]: The British really want to leave and they want to leave relatively quickly.
[Guest]: The Maharajas become an inconvenience in certain ways.
[Guest]: It makes sense.
[Guest]: Logically speaking, it makes sense.
[Guest]: The British are going to hand over power to the Congress government.
[Guest]: They're not really going to look after the Rajas.
[Guest]: The best they can do is claim that the Rajas are now freed from all obligations to the
[Guest]: British.
[Guest]: They have to negotiate independent treaties with the Indian government.
[Guest]: But you know, the Rajas, ultimately their armies aren't that strong.
[Guest]: They can't withstand the Indian army and the kind of resources the Congress party is going
[Guest]: to inherit.
[Guest]: And using that, Sardar Patel goes with carrot and stick both.
[Guest]: Where the stick is needed, he uses it.
[Guest]: In most cases, the carrot works.
[Guest]: Negotiations are held.
[Guest]: People think in 1947, the Rajas stopped ruling.
[Guest]: Not true.
[Guest]: Rajas ruled till 1949.
[Guest]: It was only when the integration took place in 1949 that they finally took a political
[Guest]: backseat.
[Guest]: They became these figurehead rulers.
[Guest]: They were given their privy purses and that was it.
[Guest]: Now here again, people assume, oh, you know, poor country, why should we pay these people
[Guest]: so much money, etc.
[Guest]: But the frank truth is they actually gave up legitimate political power they had.
[Guest]: Territories, Travancore had a revenue of 9 crores, which was one of India's richest provinces
[Guest]: at that time.
[Guest]: 9 crores doesn't sound like a lot today, but in those days, it was a heap of money for
[Guest]: such a small state of 8000 square miles.
[Guest]: One of the reasons the Maharaja was hesitant to merge with the Indian Union was because
[Guest]: Malabar, which was the part of Kerala that was under British control, was far more backward.
[Guest]: And he said, what will happen is you'll form some kind of a state between all three Malayalam
[Guest]: speaking elements and my richer subjects will end up subsidizing this place in North Kerala,
[Guest]: which is backward.
[Guest]: And what about our progress?
[Guest]: We've come so far, we will end up going backwards if we merge with other parts of Kerala, which
[Guest]: are, you know, which are going to pull us down or drag us down.
[Guest]: They had some logical economic considerations and fears as well.
[Guest]: But you know, the larger current of history was in a certain direction.
[Guest]: The British abandoned the Maharajas finally.
[Guest]: And the Maharajas had fallen out with the Congress in those final 15 odd years.
[Guest]: Even Gandhiji, who otherwise respected the Rajas, had turned around.
[Guest]: By 1940, even he was a bit anti-Maharaja after several events.
[Guest]: So you know, they became the casualties of that larger shift in history.
[Guest]: And perhaps rightly so.
[Guest]: You know, the Rajputana chapter in the book, which is chapter 7, that talks about how several
[Guest]: states would have faced trouble anyway.
[Guest]: Because in Rajputana, it was not really Congress or nationalists.
[Guest]: It was tribal unrest because the local Rajput system of governance had already started failing.
[Guest]: The world had changed.
[Guest]: So, you know, your feudal levies in Rajputana was pretty feudal.
[Guest]: It was not a place that progressed very far, unlike the southern states, for example.
[Guest]: So tribal unrest is there, peasant unrest is there.
[Guest]: It was going, in the mid 1910s and 20s, people really thought Rajputana would go Bolshevik
[Guest]: because it was getting to a stage that was pretty bad.
[Guest]: And perhaps that way the Rajas would have been toppled.
[Guest]: So the Rajas, they adapted to colonialism, but by doing so, they also limited their shelf
[Guest]: life.
[Guest]: So they became part of that structure to survive.
[Guest]: They adapted in certain ways so that when the structure collapsed, they were left flailing
[Guest]: with no place in a future India, which, you know, was perhaps how it would inevitably
[Guest]: be in the end.
[Guest]: All the book argues is that the argument that they did nothing till then is not true.
[Guest]: Many of them did great things, in fact.
[Guest]: Many of them contributed to the process of what we would today call a nation building
[Guest]: or part of India's national story and narrative.
[Guest]: All of that is, it's important that we acknowledge that.
[Guest]: Just to understand modern Indian history better.
[Guest]: But indeed in the final stage, they in many ways let themselves down.
[Guest]: Of course, their final obituary by Indira Gandhi was perhaps a bit unfair.
[Guest]: Her argument was, we are paying these people lots of money, it was actually not that much
[Guest]: money.
[Guest]: You know, very few Rajas had grand, as I said, of the 562, most got really trivial sums.
[Guest]: Very few had large sums.
[Guest]: And in most states, it was agreed that with each generation, the amount would be reduced,
[Guest]: reduced further, till finally it was just a nominal kind of figure.
[Guest]: The reason Indira Gandhi finally, you know, sort of ended the Privy Purses is simply because
[Guest]: the Maharajas were not happy with her socialist turn.
[Guest]: They were funding opposition parties.
[Guest]: The Rajmata Vijayanagar was a key funder of the Janasang, for example.
[Guest]: The Swatantra Party used to get funding from the Maharajas.
[Guest]: She basically wanted a little bit like today's government, you know, doesn't allow other
[Guest]: parties to get funding from industrial houses.
[Guest]: Same logic.
[Guest]: If you pay them, I will come and attack you.
[Guest]: Since the Maharajas are paying them, you're essentially taking government of India money.
[Guest]: Indira Gandhi sees herself as the government of India, and you're using it to attack the
[Guest]: government of India.
[Guest]: I'm not going to allow it.
[Guest]: She puts an end to the Privy Purses.
[Guest]: Of course, she gives it socialist justification and all that, but it wasn't such a big deal.
[Guest]: It wasn't such a big amount.
[Guest]: It was not a big drain on the Indian exchequer.
[Guest]: It was simply, I think, for political reasons, that that promise was broken.
[Guest]: And you know, that was that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's unfortunate how much Narendra Modi has learned from Indira Gandhi, though one
[Amit Varma]: could argue they're both creatures of their perverse incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And I was amused by the phrase that you just used that Nehru was allergic to hereditary
[Amit Varma]: rulers.
[Amit Varma]: I wonder how he would have kind of felt today.
[Amit Varma]: So you mentioned the possibility that was held out by many that the Indian state would
[Amit Varma]: not hold, the center would not hold, it would collapse.
[Amit Varma]: You pointed out the prediction that the Congress leaders would be slaughtered.
[Amit Varma]: Now the thing is, history happened.
[Amit Varma]: And we know that none of that happened.
[Amit Varma]: The center held, the Congress leaders were not slaughtered, and we are here today.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, history always makes seem everything that has already happened inevitable, like
[Amit Varma]: it's 100% going to happen this way.
[Amit Varma]: But there was a nonzero chance that the center would not hold.
[Amit Varma]: There was a nonzero chance that it would all fall apart.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's precisely because of that, that our constitution was designed to be so centralizing
[Amit Varma]: that we kept so much of the oppressive colonial apparatus because we needed it for stability
[Amit Varma]: and for circumstances like that.
[Amit Varma]: So even though your book isn't about that and doesn't touch on that, but you are a historian
[Amit Varma]: and you've read a lot, how big would you say that nonzero chance really was?
[Guest]: I mean, again, this is, you know, it's speculative to say what might have happened.
[Guest]: But I think because we made a wise choice to retain, for example, the administrative
[Guest]: services, that administrative apparatus, the same officials who are serving the British
[Guest]: government of India, one fine morning woke up and started serving the Nehruvian government
[Guest]: of India.
[Guest]: There was no ego clash there.
[Guest]: You know, it's not like, oh, you supported previous people, therefore I won't play with
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: Sardar Patel, for example, had an important role.
[Guest]: I don't think Nehru liked VP Menon a lot.
[Guest]: But Sardar Patel had no issues with the fact that VP Menon came out of the British bureaucracy
[Guest]: and had served the British state for so long because he was able to arrange for a smooth
[Guest]: transition and make sure that although the people in power at the top have changed, overall
[Guest]: the structure remains more or less the same because otherwise if you sort of tamper with
[Guest]: everything all at once, the whole thing will fall apart.
[Guest]: So holding it together required sort of, you know, as you said, holding on to colonial
[Guest]: rules, etc., colonial laws and the apparatus.
[Guest]: I think that's the only reason we didn't sort of break apart.
[Guest]: I think that was a wise decision, whether it was taken consciously or subconsciously,
[Guest]: because you weren't sort of lighting too many fires all at once.
[Guest]: You didn't have to firefight all at once either.
[Guest]: You were able to go one after the other because overall there was a degree of stability.
[Guest]: Then the other big thing is one big issue was, of course, partition.
[Guest]: So there was a lot of energy and attention sort of diverted into that, but the rest of
[Guest]: the country, to great measure, was stable.
[Guest]: Just because the British left, it was not as though everything collapsed and people
[Guest]: started fighting with each other and all of that.
[Guest]: It was all controlled very quickly.
[Guest]: The Indian Army, you know, it was an army that fought in the name of the British King
[Guest]: in World War II, but we retained it.
[Guest]: We retained the same officers, the same leadership, and we were able to sort of do that without
[Guest]: getting personal, without letting egos get in the way, which unfortunately is not true
[Guest]: today anymore.
[Guest]: If you have served a previous government, then you can be sacked by the next government.
[Guest]: It's a very dangerous game because the whole point of having a bureaucracy that is not
[Guest]: part of that political sort of shifting of sands is precisely for stability, whereas
[Guest]: if bureaucracy also becomes political very quickly, then everything is political.
[Guest]: Everything then can start shifting.
[Guest]: That's a bit dangerous.
[Guest]: In 1947, we didn't make that mistake as much, but that mistake can be made in the future
[Guest]: also.
[Guest]: And then we'll perhaps have an answer to your question as to where it will take us.
[Guest]: In 1947, we missed that terrible possibility, but, you know, you can never take it for granted
[Guest]: in India that, you know, now this is set and now the landscape will never change.
[Guest]: I don't think you can say that with any guarantee.
[Guest]: It depends entirely on who's in control and how much they're willing to play by the rules
[Guest]: of the game, because everything ultimately boils down to the rules of the game.
[Amit Varma]: Rules are what hold it together.
[Amit Varma]: Speaking of an independent bureaucracy, I had an episode a couple of weeks back with
[Amit Varma]: Josie Joseph, and one of the big themes that comes out from his book is that the reason
[Amit Varma]: India's security state is such a menace to our citizens, but the way it has been designed
[Amit Varma]: is that it is under political control.
[Amit Varma]: So everyone who, you know, comes to power is going to use it to oppress his enemies,
[Amit Varma]: you know.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of one of the ironic things that I think, like Modi was an RSS pracharak
[Amit Varma]: in the mid 70s when emergency happened.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there is this famous story about him going to the railway station in Ahmedabad
[Amit Varma]: to meet either George Fernandes or Subramanian Swamy, whatever dressed as a Sardar.
[Amit Varma]: George Fernandes, I think it was in receiving him and taking him to a guest house and all.
[Amit Varma]: And you would imagine that the lesson which Modi and Jaitley and all of those people who
[Amit Varma]: were jailed would take from that is that we should not be this oppressive, that we should
[Amit Varma]: make the state less oppressive.
[Amit Varma]: But the lesson they seem to have taken instead is that when we come to power, we will be
[Amit Varma]: in charge of this state and we will use it as we want.
[Guest]: That is usually the case.
[Guest]: I mean, ultimately, it all boils down to power, right?
[Guest]: You know, I have power now.
[Guest]: So why should I give up?
[Guest]: Why will I?
[Guest]: I've worked very hard to gain power.
[Guest]: Now, why will I sit and dilute the things that, you know, that matter for power?
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Guest]: I'm happy being, you know, just as oppressive, except that it really is a question of who's
[Guest]: in power.
[Amit Varma]: That's all.
[Amit Varma]: And again, it struck me in the context of why we didn't break up in 47.
[Amit Varma]: And here's a question of how big a role does inertia play in history?
[Amit Varma]: Like looking through history, one would imagine that every moment in some way or the other
[Amit Varma]: because of the conflicts or the turmoil or the injustices that are happening, every moment
[Amit Varma]: holds a seat for evolution.
[Amit Varma]: But what you have instead, most of the time is a slow evolution.
[Amit Varma]: So looking at the currents of history in the time that you have, how big a role does inertia
[Amit Varma]: play?
[Amit Varma]: How much of history is shaped not by what people do, but by what they don't do?
[Guest]: Good deal.
[Guest]: I think 1857 is a good example.
[Guest]: As I said, a lot of the Rajas actually supported the British because they saw advantage in
[Guest]: supporting the British at that time.
[Guest]: You could easily say that if they decided to jump on the revolutionary bandwagon or
[Guest]: the rebellion or joined it, the British would have been kicked out.
[Guest]: Punjab Maharajas who were enabling supplies to the Delhi army, for example, if the Maharajas
[Guest]: had cut off supplies, the Delhi army would have struggled.
[Guest]: So it's a bit complicated.
[Guest]: I don't know if inertia is the word I would choose.
[Guest]: They all had their incentives to behave the way they did at that time.
[Guest]: It was not like they lay back and said, oh, let me just watch what is happening.
[Guest]: No, they actively made certain choices, which in hindsight may look like the bad choice,
[Guest]: look like inertia or whatever.
[Guest]: But at that time to them, it made sense.
[Guest]: Some cases, however, are just, I suppose, accidents of history.
[Guest]: You know, I was reading this book by Amarpal Singh.
[Guest]: It's coming out with Harper Collins on the 1857 rebellion, and he focuses just on Delhi.
[Guest]: And it's fascinating that the rebels have a huge advantage over the British.
[Guest]: The British have the only advantage that they have a strategic location where they've come
[Guest]: and the rebels didn't even bother to block them off from that location.
[Guest]: That location was sitting there, the rebels could have just taken control of it.
[Guest]: But by the time they did, the British had come in and they had taken control of it.
[Guest]: The second thing is the rebels had a huge advantage in terms of numbers.
[Guest]: Each faction in it, it was not a regimented army where everybody listened to one commander.
[Guest]: There was no single commander.
[Guest]: There were different kinds of commanders with different backgrounds who had their own internal
[Guest]: politics, their own internal incentives.
[Guest]: Some groups are going around plundering Delhi itself.
[Guest]: Some are going to the emperor and blackmailing the emperor.
[Guest]: Others are going and telling the emperor, no, no, no, we'll rein them in.
[Guest]: You are protected and your people will be protected.
[Guest]: Lots of chaos is happening in the same process.
[Guest]: What was most fascinating is outside Delhi, there are these tribes or these communities
[Guest]: of Gurjars.
[Guest]: And it's so interesting that if, let's say, an Englishman is riding to say Meerut or Mathura,
[Guest]: one of those places, these people will catch hold of him, strip him of all his valuables
[Guest]: and then send him off.
[Guest]: But if it's a rebel going, they'll do the same thing to the rebel leader as well.
[Guest]: Because for them, it makes no difference if it's a white person or if it's a brown Indian
[Guest]: fighting against the British, both are equally targets for plunder.
[Guest]: That is what is happening in the countryside.
[Guest]: Now again, there's a logic for this.
[Guest]: They don't see themselves as part of one nation.
[Guest]: They don't see themselves as part of one common grand cause.
[Guest]: It did not work.
[Guest]: Is that inertia?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: It's just that at that time, in that logic, in their context, this is what they saw.
[Guest]: My self-interest.
[Guest]: Why should I bother about what is happening in Delhi or what the rebels are wanting to
[Guest]: do?
[Guest]: As far as I'm concerned, I've got an opportunity to make a lot of money through plunder.
[Guest]: Let me just focus on that.
[Guest]: Whatever happens in Delhi, kings come, kings go, rulers come, rulers go.
[Guest]: We will just take care of our self-interest.
[Guest]: And that at different political levels, you see that playing out in different ways.
[Guest]: That's why I'm not a bit hesitant to say inertia plays a role.
[Guest]: But I think not everybody perhaps subscribes to a grand vision.
[Guest]: Not everybody is part of some kind of grand movement of history.
[Guest]: It's not really the case as far as I can see.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this is really everything you've described, I agree.
[Amit Varma]: Inertia doesn't fit it because these are just people responding to their immediate incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, game theory could explain why most of the princes said they supported the
[Amit Varma]: British during 1857.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, if you give them an ideal situation where there is a guarantee that
[Amit Varma]: everybody will be on the same side, they'll choose that side.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, you just go for the status quo and play safe.
[Amit Varma]: I think by inertia, I meant something that is outside of incentives, more a bias towards
[Amit Varma]: inaction as it were, which I think plays a part in all our lives as individuals, certainly.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know how it comes together.
[Amit Varma]: But let's get back to your book now.
[Amit Varma]: And your first chapter is titled Raja in a Suit.
[Amit Varma]: And it's about Travancore about which you've already written so much.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about what's happening here.
[Amit Varma]: How is the relationship between the Travancore kings like Uttaram Tirunal and his successors?
[Amit Varma]: How is that evolving that relationship with the British Empire and so on?
[Guest]: So you know, this Uttaram Tirunal was at this interesting juncture where he's inherited
[Guest]: a system where kingship is defined very much through temple service, Hindu religious institutions.
[Guest]: In fact, there's a report written by one of his divans, which is all about and it's fascinating.
[Guest]: It's an administrative report, but it's about the quality of priests and temples, how many
[Guest]: meals are being dispensed to Brahmins.
[Guest]: Those are the kind of incentives that those are the things that define what a good Hindu
[Guest]: state is at that time.
[Guest]: But he's also facing pressures that come from the presence of Christian missionaries who
[Guest]: are talking about caste and saying that this is unjust.
[Guest]: Missionaries, of course, they were not altruistic or completely sort of impartial parties.
[Guest]: They had their own agendas and intentions as well.
[Guest]: But they were highlighting an important truth that the king, is he just the king of the
[Guest]: elites and the existing system?
[Guest]: Or is it his job also to ameliorate the conditions of poorer people who are not privileged and
[Guest]: who are marginalized?
[Guest]: That's a question that comes up.
[Guest]: The British come up and they're like, a king's job is not just to preside over this partially
[Guest]: religious, partially political order, but to actively promote progress, which is what?
[Guest]: Roads, dams, schools, irrigation, that kind of thing.
[Guest]: So he realizes that I'm at this juncture and he's not always successful at it.
[Guest]: He's very good socially with the British because he speaks English, wears English suits and
[Guest]: likes to be painted in English suits and all that.
[Guest]: But he realizes that I need to be able to negotiate this other language as well.
[Guest]: That is where Travancore's modernization begins.
[Guest]: It doesn't come from the kings deciding one fine morning that, oh, we will now be modernizers
[Guest]: and we will set new standards.
[Guest]: No, it comes from real political pressures and their desire to preserve the sanctity
[Guest]: and the power of the throne.
[Guest]: To preserve that power, they have to adapt.
[Guest]: So their game with the British is constantly adapting.
[Guest]: That's where that Madhav Rao, who we mentioned at the start, he comes in.
[Guest]: They find him as a good candidate who's in good books with the British, speaks English,
[Guest]: but is also a Hindu Brahmin and therefore meets all the criteria that you require.
[Guest]: As a Brahmin, he has social authority over Hindus.
[Guest]: As an English speaker from an English school in Madras, he's got contacts with the British.
[Guest]: He becomes the person who starts, the word is reform, they start reforming the state,
[Guest]: cutting down certain taxes, antiquated taxes are thrown out of the window, roads are being
[Guest]: built, agriculture is being widened, coffee cultivation instead of forests.
[Guest]: The forests are being cut down and you've got plantations coming in.
[Guest]: Lots of innovative things that are coming in.
[Guest]: Things that are sometimes just fashionable, because the British think it's fashionable.
[Guest]: Not all of it is true.
[Guest]: The Maharajas also knew that there were different ways of manipulating the British.
[Guest]: For example, a lot of things, every year they would have a progress report that they would
[Guest]: publish in the English language, talking about how many miles of roads they'd built, etc.
[Guest]: But what's interesting is a lot of the social reform stayed just on paper.
[Guest]: The British came and said, why is it that lower castes are not allowed on your roads?
[Guest]: Maharaja will issue a proclamation saying, all lower castes are now allowed on the roads.
[Guest]: In reality, it changes nothing.
[Guest]: In my grandmother's village, as late as the 1950s, nobody would dare walk on the temple
[Guest]: road, even though officially in the 1920s itself, the rules had been changed and all
[Guest]: roads had been thrown open.
[Guest]: So there was a conversation going on with the British and they also knew exact ways
[Guest]: in which to impress the British.
[Guest]: English language, write reports, have statistics and keep the British resident at bay.
[Guest]: And then, if you're building schools, you can also justify spending money on your temple
[Guest]: rituals.
[Guest]: If you're only doing temple rituals, then the British will come and nag you.
[Guest]: So this becomes a form of adapting.
[Guest]: So good governance itself becomes a form of keeping the imperial power at bay.
[Guest]: Because that's the only way you can give the resident and the British no cause for complaint.
[Guest]: Once you've taken care of what is called good government, you can do what you want.
[Guest]: You have the freedom and the room to maneuver and continue your Brahminical Hindu riots,
[Guest]: etc, etc.
[Guest]: And Uttaram Tirunelveli is the man who starts it in the 1850s.
[Guest]: But it's taken forward by his nephews, Ailyam and Vishakam, of whom Ailyam is in power for
[Guest]: 20 years.
[Guest]: So he's bursting with energy.
[Guest]: He's an heir apparent, so poor man can't sit on the throne till his brother dies.
[Guest]: So he's setting up a cigar factory.
[Guest]: He's a botanist.
[Guest]: He's collecting plants.
[Guest]: He's writing commentaries on Sanskrit texts.
[Guest]: He's writing articles in newspapers.
[Guest]: He's writing anonymous articles criticizing British policy.
[Guest]: He's writing open articles criticizing British policy.
[Guest]: Fascinating.
[Guest]: Some of the writings he's put down, it's almost the same language as a Gokhale, as a Ranade,
[Guest]: because he's speaking that same general language.
[Guest]: He talks openly as a Maharaja about how the British, if the empire has to have a moral
[Guest]: purpose, it is ultimately of handing India back to Indians.
[Guest]: He's also able to, as a Maharaja, he's able to articulate a future where Indians will
[Guest]: be in charge of India.
[Guest]: And that's fascinating.
[Guest]: You don't think of Maharajas thinking about these things.
[Guest]: But he is thinking about larger issues.
[Guest]: He rules only for five years.
[Guest]: But both Maharajas are extremely hands-on.
[Guest]: They realize that to beat the British and to keep the British at bay, to preserve our
[Guest]: own power, we've got to work for it.
[Guest]: Whether it's changing our costume, whether it's changing the language we speak, whether
[Guest]: it's focusing on political reform, we have to do it to survive.
[Guest]: Their nephew sort of drops the ball a little bit and it creates room for the British to
[Guest]: once again come and poke their nose in Travancore.
[Guest]: But for a good 20-30 years, these two Maharajas managed to hold their own and just play the
[Guest]: British.
[Guest]: They played within rules set by the British, but they aced that game.
[Guest]: They said the rules are unfair, the ground is not a level playing field, it's tilted
[Guest]: in favor of the British, but we will still play and we will still succeed.
[Amit Varma]: And in great measure, they did.
[Amit Varma]: And what I kind of find fascinating about this beyond the larger currents that you talk
[Amit Varma]: about is also the intimate personal portraits that emerge.
[Amit Varma]: For example, Uttarantirunal is so fascinating in the sense that, you know, you've described
[Amit Varma]: him as what a charming kid he is.
[Amit Varma]: I think when he's a little infant, he climbs on the knee of a British Singh and asks, how
[Amit Varma]: are your people doing?
[Amit Varma]: And then he takes an interest in medicine and does an apprenticeship under a proper
[Amit Varma]: doctor and starts a dispensary.
[Amit Varma]: And before he comes to the throne and people come there just because they want to interact
[Amit Varma]: with him.
[Guest]: They come with fake illnesses because, you know, a prince is treating you, it's the most
[Amit Varma]: fascinating thing.
[Amit Varma]: A prince is treating you.
[Amit Varma]: And then this obsession with Kathakali, where, you know, he is obsessed with it, but he cannot
[Amit Varma]: perform it because he's a royal.
[Amit Varma]: So he performs in front of a mirror in his palace and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, he loves European company, wears European dress, collects all kinds of
[Amit Varma]: nonsense.
[Amit Varma]: And that itself is something that should make us sit back and think that there was a time
[Amit Varma]: that a clock was a thing of wonder.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a time that a map was a thing of wonder.
[Amit Varma]: There are people who never saw a map in their lives.
[Amit Varma]: Can you imagine?
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's just absolutely fascinating.
[Guest]: And map making, that's actually a fascinating process in its own right in the late 18th
[Guest]: and early 19th century, when these surveyors would go out, a lot of people would think
[Guest]: this was an invading army because they would have flags and they would have like people
[Guest]: accompanying them with strange instruments.
[Guest]: And local people would see them with great suspicion.
[Guest]: And a lot of Indian Rajas were against these these mapping processes, because what it does
[Guest]: is it gives data to the British, it gives data to the British exactly where you have
[Guest]: a fort exactly where your boundaries are, whereas your interest lies in not having that
[Guest]: kind of precise data given to the British.
[Guest]: So each of these processes itself is political.
[Guest]: Map making itself is a political process.
[Guest]: An imperial power needs a map to know what on earth is governing.
[Guest]: The people on the ground who are doing the governing, especially the Indian Rajas, they
[Guest]: don't want the imperial power to know these things.
[Guest]: You know, there's an example, I think it's a footnote in this book, not in the main text
[Guest]: about how Kashmir, you know, they had Kashmir under their control, but the Kashmir Maharaja
[Guest]: had a habit of secreting a good part of his revenue in various forts in forms of like
[Guest]: jewel and jewels and gold, whatever.
[Guest]: At one point, the British invade, and they sort of started going to these forts and just
[Guest]: figuring out what is in these, and they discover large quantities of treasure, which they didn't
[Guest]: even know existed, because the Maharaja had hidden them away in different places.
[Guest]: One Jaipur Maharaja, he would fudge his accounts royally, you know, he modernized his government
[Guest]: in certain areas, roads, railways, fine.
[Guest]: But his revenue management, he refused to modernize, because modernization means what's
[Guest]: reports and statistics, which means what the British resident can read them and understand
[Guest]: them as easily as the Raja, nahi chahiye.
[Guest]: I will do it in a way where only I have control over the data, only I understand what this
[Guest]: data means, and through that he was able to cut off as much as 20 lakhs of his revenue
[Guest]: and avoid paying the British a higher tribute.
[Guest]: They are counter manipulating the British.
[Guest]: As late as 1906, the British are even aware of this.
[Guest]: Jaipur Maharaja makes a series of donations to British charities, and the British officials
[Guest]: say we know exactly why he's doing this, because he wants us to not pay attention to his books
[Guest]: of account.
[Guest]: So this is a form of bribery.
[Guest]: He's paying them off in some other charitable situation, so they don't poke their nose into
[Guest]: his actual serious accounts and figure out how much money he's concealing from the eyes
[Guest]: of the British, and thereby paying a lower tribute.
[Guest]: Constant wonderful like fascinating strategies in play in all these states.
[Guest]: So that reference to mapmaking just sent me down this route of thinking of how even something
[Guest]: so basic that we today take for granted was actually a political negotiation with very
[Guest]: serious political consequences.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's another web series right there, you can call it the mapmaker and the accountant
[Amit Varma]: about how information, you know, brings power with it and how it's so important.
[Amit Varma]: And the two nephews, you know, there's Ahilyam Tirunella, I hope I pronounced that right.
[Amit Varma]: Who is on the one hand, you know, he's a polyglot, he's, he's described by the British as conservative
[Amit Varma]: by temperament, but liberal by intellect.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, he's also described as a, quote, moral wreck and sexual pervert,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you describe this wonderful dying ritual, which royals apparently had almost a Dorian
[Amit Varma]: grayish kind of thing where when a royal is dying, he'll, you know, a random outside stranger
[Amit Varma]: will be paid money, a Brahmin will be paid money to come and take on all the sins of
[Amit Varma]: the royal.
[Guest]: And you basically embrace the royal who's dying.
[Guest]: And by that you sort of, you become the scapegoat, you, you, you absorb all his sins.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And then the royal dies happy that he's not committed any sins and the Brahmin is escorted
[Amit Varma]: outside the kingdom and said, Okay, get, get lost and don't come back here.
[Amit Varma]: And here's your money, presumably.
[Guest]: I don't know what's interesting in the Travancore Rajas is that the Raja embraces the Brahmin,
[Guest]: the Brahmin takes the sins, but where do they send the Brahmin?
[Guest]: Into British India.
[Guest]: Tell him you take my sins and get lost into British India.
[Guest]: Just don't come back to Travancore with my sins.
[Guest]: Lovely.
[Amit Varma]: There's a story in that also, maybe, you know, maybe there's a Brahmin who goes to all the
[Amit Varma]: different kingdoms and does this.
[Amit Varma]: And Visakhan Tirunal is also so fascinating that one, there is that poignant frustration
[Amit Varma]: that he's next in line for the throne for 20 years.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is that because of the matrilineal structure, you know, it's the earlier Kings
[Amit Varma]: Uttram's sister's kids who are the next in line.
[Amit Varma]: So his brother is the king.
[Amit Varma]: It's not like his father is a king and eventually the father will die.
[Amit Varma]: His brother is the king.
[Amit Varma]: He has to wait.
[Amit Varma]: He has to outlive his brother.
[Amit Varma]: God knows how long he will get.
[Amit Varma]: There is that whole poignant thing.
[Amit Varma]: And what comes naturally out of this is that he hates his brother's courtiers and one of
[Amit Varma]: them is Raja Ravi Varma.
[Amit Varma]: So he kicks Raja Ravi Varma out of the throne.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the one painting that you have of Visakhan in your book is by Ramaswamy Naidu,
[Amit Varma]: who's Raja Ravi Varma's big rival.
[Guest]: What do you think of his work?
[Guest]: Equally interesting.
[Guest]: In fact, Ramaswamy Naidu is not as famous.
[Guest]: Ravi Varma sort of became more famous and his name we all know now.
[Guest]: But in the late 19th century, Ramaswamy Naidu was also a very famous artist.
[Guest]: And in fact, before Ravi Varma, Madhav Rao, who was Diwan of Travancore and then became
[Guest]: Diwan of Baroda, he actually invited Ramaswamy Naidu to come.
[Guest]: And this is again, I should credit Rahul Sagar for this.
[Guest]: He recently told me about this.
[Guest]: In 1876, Madhav Rao invites Ramaswamy Naidu to come and visit Baroda and work there.
[Guest]: But Raja Ravi Varma comes only around 1880, 1880, 1881.
[Guest]: That is when Ravi Varma comes.
[Guest]: He's second.
[Guest]: So that essentially shows that Ramaswamy Naidu, even as late as the early 1880s, was sort
[Guest]: of considered one notch perhaps higher than Ravi Varma.
[Guest]: Although eventually Ravi Varma sort of picked up.
[Guest]: One of the reasons being Ravi Varma's pedigree.
[Guest]: He came from an aristocratic family.
[Guest]: In many ways, he was a social equal with many of the Rajas he met.
[Guest]: So he visits Udaipur, for example, and Udaipur has a local painter from a local artist and
[Guest]: cast who's actually gone to London and studied at the Slade School of Art on a scholarship
[Guest]: from the Maharana.
[Guest]: But he's still treated as a craftsman.
[Guest]: Whereas Ravi Varma, when he comes, he's treated as a nobleman.
[Guest]: He's given robes of honor.
[Guest]: He's given a necklace.
[Guest]: He's not just given a fee.
[Guest]: He's treated as an equal through these symbolic gifts as well, which I think plays a big role
[Guest]: in Ravi Varma's reputation.
[Guest]: Ravi Varma's reputation wasn't purely talent.
[Guest]: It was also privilege.
[Guest]: It was also the fact that he could move around with great ease among the crowd that he was
[Guest]: painting.
[Guest]: He was never in a supplicant position.
[Guest]: He was like this fashionable man who came from an aristocratic family with tens of thousands
[Guest]: of acres of land, sisters-in-law, Aranis of Travancore.
[Guest]: He was in some ways exotic to the British for that reason.
[Guest]: That's why they called him the painter prince.
[Guest]: He wasn't a prince, but that tag sort of caught on because of his background.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, speaking of Raja Ravi Varma, to take a quick digression, I just realized
[Amit Varma]: that it is very much sanskari for me to take digressions because hey, our epics did.
[Amit Varma]: But to take that digression, from the time you first saw Raja Ravi Varma's paintings,
[Amit Varma]: what is the effect of your appreciation of his work due to context?
[Amit Varma]: Like one, you get the kind of context of the different influences that he's getting, like
[Amit Varma]: those early influences in the Travancore kingdom are obviously the Kerala murals and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But as you point out, he then spends a lot of time in the palace where he looks at, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the art of the European artists and gets influenced by that.
[Amit Varma]: And then he's traveling through all these places, he's evolving.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things that happened in Baroda was that he got so much patronage there that
[Amit Varma]: he was freely allowed to travel and show his paintings and that becomes popular.
[Amit Varma]: He can buy his lithograph press and no doubt that changes the direction of his work.
[Amit Varma]: How much is your appreciation impacted both by getting a deeper understanding of the circumstances
[Amit Varma]: and the context in which he's creating his work, and also by the good luck and the privilege,
[Amit Varma]: as you describe it, and the fact that it must have been so much harder for competition.
[Amit Varma]: And also for what his work came to mean, like at a particular point in time, we discussed
[Amit Varma]: civilizational identity earlier, and you've also pointed out about mythological paintings
[Amit Varma]: became so popular and perhaps played a part like Amar Chitra Katha in later days, or,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the serial Mahabharata and Ramayana in the 80s, perhaps played a part in forming
[Guest]: a part of that civilizational identity.
[Guest]: Yeah, because this is where Baroda's state comes in, because till then Ravi Orma's doing
[Guest]: mainly a lot of sentimental works, in the sense, woman with a flower, woman doing her
[Guest]: hair, you know, these pretty paintings, which lots of people like, and he's doing portraits.
[Guest]: This is his thing.
[Guest]: With Baroda, what he taps into really is depicting scenes from the epics.
[Guest]: He started doing some of it.
[Guest]: He's done a Shakuntala, for example, he's done a Sita Bhumi Pravesh, for example, before
[Guest]: he comes to Baroda.
[Guest]: But in Baroda, really, the kind of interest the Maharaja has in having these epic scenes
[Guest]: depicted in that realistic academic Western style, that gives him an idea.
[Guest]: And he displays these paintings before they are sent to the palace.
[Guest]: And the kind of people who come there, they're in awe.
[Guest]: Because the thing is, you've gone to temples and you've seen sculptures, you've gone and
[Guest]: seen figurines of gods that you can perhaps do puja to in your houses.
[Guest]: But you've never seen goddesses in high neck blouses and contemporary sarees.
[Guest]: Remember that at that time, this is a very contemporary dress that is being worn.
[Guest]: We now look at a Ravi Arnav painting saying, oh, so quaint and so old fashioned at that
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: This is basically the fashionable way of draping the saree in Bengal.
[Guest]: Your gods have come out in human form in front of you.
[Guest]: And this is, he wasn't the first to do it, but his works, because of the access he had,
[Guest]: managed to garner a lot of attention.
[Guest]: And that sets him off on an idea which is larger than art itself.
[Guest]: It's sort of a nationalistic thing.
[Guest]: And this is where Sayajeev Rao also supports him.
[Guest]: And most importantly, Madhav Rao, who is the Diwan, he seeds in Ravi Arnav the idea that
[Guest]: your paintings are fine, but only elites are collecting them.
[Guest]: If you make prints of the paintings, they can go across to all households in India and
[Guest]: become a real major thing and create a kind of national imagery for India.
[Guest]: Ravi Arnav has that idea clearly in his head because of Madhav Rao's comment.
[Guest]: Sayajeev Rao's commission of those 14 Puranic paintings and the success this received whenever
[Guest]: they displayed, he realizes that maybe I should invest in a lithograph press.
[Guest]: So then these paintings are churned out in these cheap prints that are there.
[Guest]: And that's why he's by some called a calendar artist.
[Guest]: But the thing is, suddenly your gods are able to come to your house and they look appealing,
[Guest]: they look accessible, and you've got them on your walls.
[Guest]: So ever since then, when people shut their eyes and they visualize a Saraswati or a Lakshmi,
[Guest]: people are visualizing a Ravi Varma depiction of Saraswati and Lakshmi in a saree, standing
[Guest]: in a certain way, with that proper long sleeved high neck blouse.
[Guest]: It's not your traditional sculpture where the women are topless.
[Guest]: It's not your traditional sculpture where the women are voluptuous.
[Guest]: It is a very Victorianized, but then socially, in the late 19th century, very socially acceptable
[Guest]: way of depicting women.
[Guest]: But they're also goddesses and they also look larger than life.
[Guest]: He's not completely humanized them that they look common.
[Guest]: At the same time, he's made them human enough for people to take a very keen interest.
[Guest]: So he does end up doing something and he's very aware that this has a kind of national
[Guest]: resonance.
[Guest]: The idea is, at the time when the nationalism is being built, when the nation itself is
[Guest]: being built, people are aware of difference, Gujarati, Bengali, Maharaja of Baroda, one
[Guest]: of his incentives in sort of allowing this kind of grand depiction, which can appeal
[Guest]: in any corner of India, is because he's very aware of dealing with differences within Indians,
[Guest]: you know, among Indians.
[Guest]: So when you create this kind of a Lakshmi, it doesn't matter whether you are in Kerala
[Guest]: or in Kashmir, it will appeal to people.
[Guest]: He's given it a visual form that will appeal to people and give them one more means by
[Guest]: which to realize that you are part of one common story and one common religious slash
[Guest]: civilizational tradition.
[Guest]: How much of this he did consciously from the start is debatable, but it's clear that the
[Guest]: idea was told to him by Madhavrao with a very clear statement that this will have a nationalist
[Guest]: kind of impact.
[Guest]: And he runs with the idea, gets the patronage of Maharaja of Baroda and, you know, ends
[Guest]: up doing something that, in some ways, the reputation he enjoys among commoner communities
[Guest]: or more ordinary people is because of the prints, not because of his grand paintings.
[Guest]: The paintings were in palaces and big halls, the prints are what really made him a, I wouldn't
[Guest]: call a household name, but a much more sort of well-known figure across India, which in
[Guest]: those days was not an easy thing to build that kind of reputation.
[Guest]: That's why he left Ramaswamy Naidu behind.
[Guest]: Ramaswamy Naidu never became a household name, whereas he did by taking that very business
[Guest]: decision of churning out prints that would appeal to everyone, whether it's a tilak in
[Guest]: Maharashtra or Maharaja of Baroda in Gujarat or the Mysore Maharaja in the south, everybody
[Amit Varma]: loves them.
[Amit Varma]: And is that a double-edged sword in some way?
[Amit Varma]: Like on the one hand, of course, there's something that goes across regions and across people
[Amit Varma]: and across languages and speaks to people.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, is making a picture of something for the very first time in a
[Amit Varma]: sense an act of vandalism, simply because if you're painting a goddess and so many different
[Amit Varma]: conceptions of the goddess could have existed before, but then you make that picture and
[Amit Varma]: then that is the picture.
[Amit Varma]: And then when people think of the goddess, they think of that picture by Raja Ravi Varma.
[Amit Varma]: And have we lost something in doing that by homogenizing a particular idea of something?
[Guest]: Yeah, but you know, and that's why I said in context, if you look at it, it was a time
[Guest]: of homogenizing.
[Guest]: Everybody wanted a common nationalism, a common identity, a common language.
[Guest]: Hindi is essentially constructed in the late 19th century to serve as some kind of common
[Guest]: unifying language.
[Guest]: In that time, it was part of that homogenizing trend, you know, and it's clearly left an
[Guest]: impact.
[Guest]: As you said, even that serial Ramayana, the kind of thing, costumes they wear, they look
[Guest]: like they walked out of a Ravi Varma painting because it's clearly left that kind of a cultural
[Guest]: impact.
[Guest]: Have we lost something?
[Guest]: Yes, we have.
[Guest]: The diversity, the different ways of depicting God, some in ways that would not be considered
[Guest]: sanitized and proper anymore, you know, some that were very localized, very regional.
[Guest]: A lot of subaltern traditions of art have been lost because he also elevated a Brahminical
[Guest]: reading of things, not just, you know, because he came from a highly Sanskritized family.
[Guest]: His mother, everybody was scholars in Sanskrit.
[Guest]: So their reading was also extremely elite, not just in class terms, but also in caste
[Guest]: terms.
[Guest]: And that became the new gold standard, leaving out a lot of other forms of, you know, representing
[Guest]: these ideas even.
[Guest]: In his paintings, it's always the maid or the Asura women who are dark skinned, you
[Guest]: know, everybody else is fair, which is ironic because a lot of the Puranic figures he painted
[Guest]: in the Puranas, they're dark.
[Guest]: Draupadi is dark, but he paints her fair, you know, Krishna is dark, but he won't make
[Guest]: him that dark.
[Guest]: You know, Shri Rama also, he will not make him very dark, whereas the maid will be properly
[Guest]: dark.
[Guest]: Ravi Varma's mother-in-law was dark and he painted her as she was.
[Guest]: But perhaps there was a reason people often don't like their mothers-in-law.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And a formidable woman, you've described this famous murder case, I think of 1862, where
[Amit Varma]: this mother-in-law was allegedly having a scene with some outsider to the family and
[Amit Varma]: the father-in-law got that person murdered and it was a famous case and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: You also speak about Raja Ravi Varma's iconic painting, There Comes Papa in this, which
[Amit Varma]: was really a painting which showed his wife Kochupanki and daughter Mahaprabha and Mahaprabha
[Amit Varma]: and her son.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, Mahaprabha and her son, sorry.
[Amit Varma]: And it's called There Comes Papa.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing about this, which you point out is that so far, at that point,
[Amit Varma]: Kerala society was really matrilineal.
[Amit Varma]: The women mattered.
[Guest]: You waited for the mother, you waited for the woman, the uncle at most.
[Amit Varma]: The papa was like a very peripheral figure.
[Amit Varma]: But here that is flipped around.
[Amit Varma]: The woman and the child are waiting for papa.
[Guest]: Because he's doing this.
[Guest]: This painting is being displayed for a victorianised audience for whom the papa matters.
[Guest]: So you know, if you asked a Malayali of that generation who your father is, they wouldn't,
[Guest]: they would answer.
[Guest]: But the real question is, who's your uncle?
[Guest]: You know that your maternal uncle, your mother's brother, who's your mother?
[Guest]: What is her family?
[Guest]: That is what matters.
[Guest]: To illustrate, I remember asking my grandfather, his father's name I knew, because my grandfather
[Guest]: told him.
[Guest]: And I asked him, what is your father's father's name?
[Guest]: Grandfather had no clue.
[Guest]: He has no idea who his father's father is.
[Guest]: He knows who his mother's father is, but not his father's father, because that man was
[Guest]: never in the picture.
[Guest]: There was no question because he was, your father himself is from a different family.
[Guest]: Father's father, nobody even bothers to care about, you know, it's not a question that
[Guest]: arises naturally.
[Guest]: When I asked him, he actually sat down and wondered, why on earth have I never asked
[Guest]: this question?
[Guest]: Because even in the 30s, when he was growing up, it was still a matrilineal sort of culture
[Guest]: where people still focused on the mother's side.
[Guest]: Ravi Varma's painting though, although he painted his wife, his daughter and son, and
[Guest]: the lady's pointing out, someone's approaching, she's pointing out to the baby that look,
[Guest]: someone's coming.
[Guest]: To a Malayali, you would say, uncle is coming, mother is coming, grandmother's coming.
[Guest]: Father is a bit unusual.
[Guest]: Just, and we know this is for a victorianized audience, because this painting was sent to
[Guest]: America to be displayed.
[Guest]: And at that time, if you look in the painting, there's also a dog in that painting.
[Guest]: Dogs were not kept as pets in high caste Hindu houses, they were considered unclean.
[Guest]: The dog was added simply because in Western countries, the dog represented that kind of
[Guest]: domesticity.
[Guest]: And Ravi Varma wanted to signal that, oh, look, this is an Indian native woman in Malabar,
[Guest]: but even she is the same as you, even she has a pet dog, and she's waiting for her husband.
[Guest]: He's again trying to construct something that the Westerner can relate to easily, without
[Guest]: taking away too much from his daughter's, in quotes, native appearance.
[Guest]: So he's also trying to say, different, but like you, you know, that's the message he's
[Guest]: trying to send across in that painting.
[Amit Varma]: But it's kind of fascinating, because when I read about it, my assumption was that it's
[Amit Varma]: a sign of Kerala society changing.
[Amit Varma]: But what you're saying is, he's actually also signaling for his new patrons.
[Guest]: That change is something he's riding, he's realized that this change is coming.
[Guest]: And he's sort of riding that wave by saying, by sort of depicting that on canvas, you know,
[Guest]: he wants to show that, yes, change is coming, and this reform is coming in, husbands are
[Guest]: becoming very important.
[Guest]: And he's, you know, joining that conversation as well.
[Amit Varma]: To the book, one of the themes is that there is what you call a triangular contest between
[Amit Varma]: the prince, between the Diwan, and between the sort of resident or the representative
[Amit Varma]: of the British Empire.
[Amit Varma]: So how did that play out in Travancore?
[Amit Varma]: Because obviously, they kind of got lucky with the Diwans that they had, and you know,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense of Madhava Rao and Sesha Shastri.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, how is that kind of playing out?
[Amit Varma]: And how do things then proceed like this clearly a movement through the decades where things
[Amit Varma]: eventually start to unravel?
[Amit Varma]: So take me through that.
[Guest]: So the thing is, a lot of these people are very conflicted.
[Guest]: The Raja wants to progress, but only so far.
[Guest]: He doesn't want to progress so much that his royal power and authority is questioned.
[Guest]: The Diwan is educated in the English style, and therefore, he also wants to progress.
[Guest]: But he also wants the Raja to become more and more constitutional, because in his mind,
[Guest]: it's important that monarchies become constitutional in the western, in the British format, which
[Guest]: basically means what?
[Guest]: The Diwan has more power.
[Guest]: So there's also, on the one hand, the Raja and the Diwan are on the same page in terms
[Guest]: of answering British propaganda.
[Guest]: But internally, there's a conflict between the Raja and Diwan.
[Guest]: Diwan says as the minister, as an educated, trained minister, I should be supreme and
[Guest]: I should be in control.
[Guest]: The Raja should not poke his nose too much.
[Guest]: He should be constitutional.
[Guest]: Raja's like, no, no, no, I've got enough taken away by the British.
[Guest]: I'm not going to let my minister also reduce my power.
[Guest]: So there was a conflict going on between them.
[Guest]: The Sesha Shastri is actually quite fascinating because he moves to Pudukottai.
[Guest]: And you see these twin pressures that are in that state.
[Guest]: On the one hand, the British as well as Madhavra.
[Guest]: Madhavra writes to Sesha Shastri saying Pudukottai is in a terrible state.
[Guest]: If it continues like this, the British will come and take over the state.
[Guest]: As Indians, we are all naturally well-wishers of the states.
[Guest]: We have to protect the states.
[Guest]: So you're like a doctor.
[Guest]: Think of yourself as a doctor going there to rescue a patient or think of Pudukottai
[Guest]: as an insect struggling on water and you have to go and sort of save it.
[Guest]: So Sesha Shastri is going into the state with this huge savior complex.
[Guest]: So his incentives are multiple there.
[Guest]: He wants to make the state reformed and progressive so it can answer British standards and sort
[Guest]: of exceed British standards to an extent he succeeds.
[Guest]: But in the process, he's also an upper caste Brahmin man in a kingdom governed by robber
[Guest]: caste kings which are technically much lower than him in the caste hierarchy.
[Guest]: He cannot help but try and Brahminize these people as well.
[Guest]: So in Trivandrum, the Raja calls himself Padmanabha Dasa because his deity is Padmanabha Swami.
[Guest]: Sesha comes and says, okay, now you have to start in Pudukottai, the state deity is Brihadamba,
[Guest]: you have to call yourself Brihadamba Dasa.
[Guest]: It was a title some Rajas used, but it was by no means a key title to the throne.
[Guest]: Whereas now Sesha Shastri uses that and makes the Raja this very pious Brahminized sort
[Guest]: of version of king.
[Guest]: Then similarly, Sesha Shastri dismantles the entire internal structure which depends on
[Guest]: Kallar Lords, you know, internal relatives of the royal family and bureaucratizes the
[Guest]: state.
[Guest]: So bureaucratizing a state and centralizing a state is always painful because you're taking
[Guest]: away power from traditional institutions and sort of putting it in a secretariat with men
[Guest]: who are just qualified men, not men who necessarily have roots in the ground.
[Guest]: And this is a problem a lot of princely states ultimately faced and it caused a lot of internal
[Guest]: politics as these days bureaucratized and progressed in courts, they would import bureaucrats
[Guest]: from Madras or from other parts of British India.
[Guest]: And inevitably, most of these bureaucrats would be either Tamil Brahmins or Maharashtrian
[Guest]: Brahmins.
[Guest]: So when in Travancore, when in Pudukottai, when in Mysore, people say we're fighting
[Guest]: the foreigner.
[Guest]: The foreigner refers to these Brahmins and these men who've come from other parts of
[Guest]: India and take over the bureaucracy of these states.
[Guest]: In Mysore for example, it started in the 18th century and through the 19th century it sort
[Guest]: of picked up and eventually there was this whole Travancore for Travancoreans, Mysore
[Guest]: for Mysoreans, we will not have foreigners, that kind of an argument.
[Guest]: So the Diwan has his own power to preserve, his own vision of what the king should be
[Guest]: and he's trying to push that.
[Guest]: The king has a sense of his power and how loyal the Diwan should be and is trying to
[Guest]: push that.
[Guest]: The British are sitting and watching, saying which one can we manipulate at any given time.
[Guest]: And the Maharaja is also trying to see which one can I manipulate at any given time.
[Guest]: So he, the Maharaja for example, Madhavrao at one point has a lot of power, Maharaja
[Guest]: has no option but to listen to him.
[Guest]: So Maharaja doesn't say anything to him, he goes to the British resident and complains
[Guest]: and gets the British resident to pull Madhavrao into line.
[Guest]: Later Madhavrao and Maharaja have a falling out but they decide let's keep the British
[Guest]: out, you and I will come to terms ourselves so the British don't get involved, we will
[Guest]: just close this quarrel between us ourselves.
[Guest]: Nobody has any fixed idea, this is a time of flux, everybody has multiple interests
[Guest]: in play, which is why again as I said this princely politics was by no means simplistic.
[Guest]: In Rajputana, again people will say it's quirky and eccentric, the Raja goes and he doesn't
[Guest]: like going to these imperial functions that the Viceroys invite him to.
[Guest]: Because often the Udaipur Maharana is placed behind Baroda for example, Rajputs will never
[Guest]: stand behind a Maratha for example, at least in those days, they used to look down on the
[Guest]: Marathas, so to have your elephant behind a Maratha Maharaja was hugely insulting.
[Guest]: And in Rajputana, your title was Hindu Suraj, you were the son of the Hindus, so how can
[Guest]: you go and stand behind other rulers, you have to be first in the queue.
[Guest]: So these Rajas in dealing with the British, they would come up with all kinds of diplomatic
[Guest]: illnesses.
[Guest]: Raja would come to Delhi but conveniently fall ill on the day of the Darbar and not
[Guest]: show up in the procession, or he would come to Delhi and then some urgent thing would
[Guest]: take him back to Udaipur and he would turn around.
[Guest]: So he could tell the Viceroy, hey look I came to Delhi but I am sorry something urgent came
[Guest]: and I had to go back.
[Guest]: Or he would say, I came to Delhi, so I came for your procession but I am so sorry I fell
[Guest]: ill.
[Guest]: Baroda did this once where he refused to come for one of Karsan's Darbars by saying an old
[Guest]: widow died in the palace, therefore I am Ashuddha and I have to do all kinds of rituals, therefore
[Guest]: I can't come.
[Guest]: Excuses.
[Guest]: But the thing is, an Udaipur Maharana also has to do this because if he lets the British
[Guest]: treat him, let's say not as number one, his nobles will start chewing away at his authority.
[Guest]: So he's got that to deal with.
[Guest]: He similarly, Maharana Fateh Singh of Udaipur doesn't even have a Diwan.
[Guest]: There was a Diwan called Rai Pannalal Mehta and he was in English speaking, very good
[Guest]: on good terms with the British and all of that.
[Guest]: And Raja started thinking that hold on, I think this Pannalal is becoming too pally
[Guest]: with the British at my cost.
[Guest]: If he and the residents start getting too comfortable with each other, what about my
[Guest]: power?
[Guest]: So he finds interesting strategies to get the British to sort of negotiate with him.
[Guest]: The British are very keen on a railway project into Udaipur.
[Guest]: Raja sits on it for years.
[Guest]: British say no, no, you must, must, must.
[Guest]: Finally he says I will if you let me get rid of Rai Pannalal Mehta.
[Guest]: They say fine, you get rid of your minister.
[Guest]: He gets rid of the minister.
[Guest]: Now to appoint any minister, next minister, he needs British approval.
[Guest]: Raja simply does not appoint a minister.
[Guest]: For the next many, many, many decades he simply doesn't appoint a minister, just has secretaries,
[Guest]: gets the secretaries to fight with each other so he is fully in charge, prevents the resident
[Guest]: from having too much of a say.
[Guest]: And this is another, one of the Baroda Maharajas also did this when he was told that any ministerial
[Guest]: appointment requires British sanction, no minister, I will root myself, a way of subverting
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: So there's different layers at which the same figure is acting in different ways.
[Guest]: It may seem contradictory, it may seem eccentric, it may seem strange, but it again has an internal
[Guest]: logic involving all these players simultaneously doing different things.
[Guest]: Madhavrao may feel loyalty to his British masters.
[Guest]: He may feel like he has a cause in shaping the future of the states.
[Guest]: He may feel like the ruler has to become constitutional.
[Guest]: The ruler also has certain common elements with him where he will ally with Madhavrao,
[Guest]: but at certain places he will diverge with Madhavrao and ally with the British state
[Guest]: instead.
[Guest]: So again, very complex, very complicated.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and fascinating and you said that these guys, you know, they would make excuses to
[Amit Varma]: the British where they go to Delhi and they'd say I've fallen ill.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's a credible excuse because one of the things I was struck by was, you
[Amit Varma]: know, every time you mention one of these guys for the first time, you're giving the
[Amit Varma]: year of birth and the year of death and they all died young, like, you know, Visakhan Tirunel
[Amit Varma]: at one point, I think, laments that no one in my family lives till 50.
[Amit Varma]: Beyond 50.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And Aswathi Tirunel, in fact, died of obesity, I think.
[Guest]: He had diabetes then and it became very serious because his weight was out of control.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, he died of that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, in that age where medicine was nowhere near where it is, it's so kind
[Amit Varma]: of precarious.
[Amit Varma]: From Pudukottai you also speak about the precarious state of Ramachandra Tondamayi, who was a
[Amit Varma]: king till 1886 and how after 1854, where the British kind of made the Diwan much more powerful,
[Amit Varma]: he was so dependent on the Diwan and the resident for funds that at one point in 1870, he applied
[Amit Varma]: for funds to buy a pet cheetah, which, you know, you throw in all these little things
[Amit Varma]: randomly in this thing as if it's something completely normal to buy a pet cheetah.
[Amit Varma]: The royal who fornicated with elephants.
[Amit Varma]: How does one fornicate with an elephant?
[Guest]: I have no idea.
[Guest]: The thing is, the source I've cited, I went into it to see where he got the information
[Guest]: from.
[Guest]: He doesn't reveal it because he says it would amount to defamation to name the prince who
[Guest]: was suspected of having romantic feelings for elephants.
[Guest]: So I've said that in the footnote, which is that, you know, Edward, I think it's an Edward
[Guest]: Haynes essay, where I've said Haynes has not revealed who this is because he says it's
[Guest]: defamatory.
[Guest]: But it's interesting.
[Guest]: I mean, obviously Haynes is a respected scholar, so it's very likely he got it from a series.
[Guest]: So somewhere in the archives, there must be a letter where a resident suspects that, hold
[Guest]: on, there's something wrong with this Raja.
[Guest]: The poor, that Kolhapur Maharaja I mentioned, the poor chap who was beaten to death by his
[Guest]: British warden.
[Guest]: At one time, he ran away on a bullock cart pretending to be a car driver because he was
[Guest]: so tortured and traumatized by these British tutors that had been appointed to take care
[Guest]: of him.
[Guest]: He ran away.
[Guest]: You know, his mental health was in tatters.
[Guest]: And you know, it's sad.
[Guest]: Not all of them, like Sayajirao survived the tutoring of the British and became a strong
[Guest]: man.
[Guest]: This guy was a contemporary of Sayajirao, same age, but he completely crumbled and ended
[Guest]: up dying as a young boy because he couldn't withstand the pressure.
[Guest]: So the British could be very, very cruel to people.
[Guest]: In Pudukottai, the Rani, for example, this is where Shesha Yashastri and the British
[Guest]: sort of united.
[Guest]: The British frowned on Rani's because the Rani's harems were out of control of access
[Guest]: for the British resident.
[Guest]: Even in Darbar, they could take control of, they could amend ritual.
[Guest]: But the harem is sealed.
[Guest]: It's closed.
[Guest]: You cannot enter as a white man.
[Guest]: So they always tried to get rid of the power of the women in the harem.
[Guest]: So they saw that as illicit power, illegal power, slander.
[Guest]: These women are saying they're constantly intriguing and plotting.
[Guest]: But in reality, the women saw the harem as a political space.
[Guest]: The harem had a legitimate right to advise the king and try and amend policy.
[Guest]: Shesha Yashastri doesn't like it either because he's a Devan who's an autocrat.
[Guest]: He likes power in his hands.
[Guest]: He thinks, as I said, he has a savior complex about reforming and improving and saving the
[Guest]: state.
[Guest]: But the Rani and Shesha Yashastri also sort of have issues.
[Guest]: At one point, she has a sacrifice of cobras because she's trying to get rid of him through
[Guest]: black magic.
[Guest]: And he's like, ha ha, no, none of this is going to work.
[Guest]: This is going to end up making you look worse in the eyes of the British.
[Guest]: He cuts off access from the harem to the royal bedchamber, to the boy Maharaja's chambers.
[Guest]: The Devadasis who serve the women, they're actually, Shesha Yashastri doesn't like them
[Guest]: because the Victorians don't like Devadasis.
[Guest]: But in reality, the Devadasis are a source of intelligence for the Rani's.
[Guest]: They tell, they are not parda women, Devadasis can move everywhere.
[Guest]: They're dancing girls in the court, in the temple.
[Guest]: They're hearing what the people are saying and they're overhearing conversations in court.
[Guest]: They report this to the Rani.
[Guest]: So the Rani's are not surrounded by, you know, the wrong type of women as Shesha Yashastri
[Guest]: thinks.
[Guest]: They've actually got a network of informants, which he's cutting off.
[Guest]: So all of these things, even an intervention of the harem and preventing Devadasis from
[Guest]: entering is a political act.
[Guest]: It is about saying, you are a woman, your job is not political.
[Guest]: You sit in the harem and serve the king in the bedchamber.
[Guest]: You will not get involved in politics and I will cut off all sources of political information
[Guest]: from you.
[Guest]: That's why I said, as you peel back the layers, you start realising that all these things
[Guest]: have meaning.
[Guest]: What the British sort of played down saying, oh, you know, foolish Rani surrounded by Devadasis.
[Guest]: No, she's surrounded by a network of informants who are telling her what's happening in the
[Guest]: kingdom.
[Amit Varma]: And as you describe, what Shashtri also does is that he installs his own nephew as a tutor.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, as a junior tutor.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And his own nephew is supposed to be like a smaller mirror image of his, which I found
[Amit Varma]: quite funny.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the future Raja at that time, Martanda Bhairav, he is also such a fascinating character
[Amit Varma]: that he can't, you know, he can't find an Indian woman he likes.
[Amit Varma]: So he marries this Australian, he meets in a hotel, Mollie Fink, who's called Mollie
[Amit Varma]: Fink.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: When the king hears of this, he says, what kind of name is Mollie Fink?
[Guest]: Firstly, a Raja marrying an Australian woman was quite scandalous at that time.
[Guest]: And this guy, he actually gives a speech where he says, you know, because of the way I've
[Guest]: been brought up and I'm so cosmopolitan, etc.
[Guest]: He's basically taking a jab at the British because they've raised him to be this very
[Guest]: cosmopolitan figure.
[Guest]: He's basically saying, you've made me so cosmopolitan that I must have a white wife.
[Guest]: I cannot have any local wife.
[Guest]: You know, these were things the British were horrified at.
[Guest]: Indian Maharajas having white Ranis, because it opened up all kinds of issues, you know,
[Guest]: half-breed prince, you know, would he be able to succeed to the throne?
[Guest]: Would he be a Hindu or would he be a Christian?
[Guest]: Questions the British had no interest in dealing with.
[Guest]: Plus, of course, pure racism, you know, a white man marrying a brown woman is fine.
[Guest]: A brown man, even if he's a king, marrying a white woman was a huge threat in that time.
[Amit Varma]: And you describe Shastri's dilemma also very well, that dilemma of conservatism versus
[Amit Varma]: patriotism, which would have been, I think, a dilemma that so many people would have had
[Amit Varma]: to face within themselves, right?
[Amit Varma]: Not just Shastri, but even I think all our early liberal leaders from Ranade to Gokhale
[Amit Varma]: to whatever would have kind of been trapped within that, that you want to kind of maintain
[Amit Varma]: the order of things, the way in which things have worked.
[Amit Varma]: You don't want chaos.
[Amit Varma]: You don't want anarchy to be loosed upon the world.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you know, you get the sense of this larger cause that is kind of
[Amit Varma]: coming.
[Amit Varma]: You've already spoken at Baroda about length, your fourth chapter is about that, which is
[Amit Varma]: really quite superb and should be a long, long web series, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So I would just not want to go through your entire book in detail, because one, we can't.
[Amit Varma]: It's a book with so much detail.
[Amit Varma]: And two, I'd just like readers to pick up the book for themselves.
[Amit Varma]: So some broad parting questions, in terms of your historical inquiry, what sort of interests
[Amit Varma]: you?
[Amit Varma]: Like one, obviously, is Kerala.
[Amit Varma]: You start with that urge that this is where I come from.
[Amit Varma]: These characters that I've heard about are so interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Let me find out more.
[Amit Varma]: And then because you're in Pune, because you're in Maharashtra, that whole Deccan period,
[Amit Varma]: which no one talks about, which is neither the Mughals nor Shivaji.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and all of this, in a sense, is a continuation of that.
[Amit Varma]: But what drives you for the future?
[Amit Varma]: Like are there currents of history which interest you more than others?
[Amit Varma]: Are there personalities which interest you more than others, figures which interest you
[Amit Varma]: more than others?
[Amit Varma]: What can we expect from you in times to come?
[Guest]: The common theme is just all these subjects are marginalized in one way or the other.
[Guest]: You know, we often think of marginalization through a prism of class, which is that marginalized
[Guest]: must be lower class people.
[Guest]: But in reality, the princely states are a marginalized historical subject.
[Guest]: You know, the Maharani of Trivandrum in the first book was a marginalized historical figure.
[Guest]: The Deccan is marginalized under these towering figures like Shivaji, Aurangzeb, the Mughals
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: That's also been marginalized.
[Guest]: So for me, it's always these stories that somehow are fascinating, but not enough people
[Guest]: have made an effort to tell those stories.
[Guest]: Not enough people have tried to bring that into the limelight.
[Guest]: That really is what motivates me and sort of drives me to research on things that, you
[Guest]: know, are slightly different, and which I feel deserve greater attention.
[Guest]: As I said, you know, the princely states are so fascinating.
[Guest]: To really reduce them to this cliche of elephant and dancing girls is quite tragic, because
[Guest]: not only does it do an injustice in the fact that, as I said, 40% of the country was under
[Guest]: princely rulers.
[Guest]: So essentially erasing or eclipsing 40% of the territory and its internal histories from
[Guest]: what we call modern Indian history, even in understanding how Indian political structures
[Guest]: adapted to modernity and colonialism, how Indian political figures dealt with colonialism,
[Guest]: it wasn't just Gandhiji and his satyagraha, it wasn't just Dadabhai Naoroji and his economic
[Guest]: drain theory.
[Guest]: There was also multiple other characters in that same time, each of them trying to find
[Guest]: a different answer to the same question.
[Guest]: Ultimately, one answer may have triumphed and become the big answer, but there were
[Guest]: other people trying to find solutions to the same problem.
[Guest]: And I think 70 years after independence, we should start looking at these stories, just
[Guest]: because they're so fascinating and interesting, and they tell you about the political conundrums
[Guest]: people face, the political questions people have to grapple with, the contradictory impulses
[Guest]: they feel.
[Guest]: You mentioned Sheshasastri, conservative because he's a Brahmin man, an upper caste Brahmin,
[Guest]: English educated man, but also a moderniser in terms of he wants roads and bridges, etc,
[Guest]: but not too much social reform.
[Guest]: These tell you about the kind of internal battles that human beings have, how human
[Guest]: beings are also flawed, even the greatest of them are flawed.
[Guest]: There are issues, they have their prejudices, they are also creatures of their time.
[Guest]: And frankly, in today's sometimes ultra-woke times, I think it also helps suggest that
[Guest]: we should treat people with more sympathy because people are complex, people are not
[Guest]: perfect ideal versions of what they ought to be, people have a mix of emotions and we
[Guest]: should have the maturity to deal with it that way.
[Guest]: Same with history, it's not about saying were the Maharajas good or were the Maharajas bad,
[Guest]: that's not what is interesting to me.
[Guest]: The interesting thing is, what were the Maharajas?
[Guest]: Even if they had elephants, what does the elephant represent?
[Guest]: Even if there are 20 dancing girls, why are the dancing girls there?
[Guest]: What is this court ritual supposed to represent?
[Guest]: Those questions are something we should investigate, instead of simply saying, oh elephants, dancing
[Guest]: girls, not interesting, they didn't contribute anything, bye bye.
[Guest]: Everything if you ask a question of it will throw up some fascinating answers and in many
[Guest]: ways complicate our understanding of things like nationalism, the evolution of India as
[Guest]: an idea and many of the big questions of history.
[Guest]: This may not be the answer to it, but it will shed some more light in explaining what those
[Amit Varma]: answers are.
[Amit Varma]: I think rather than use the term complicate our understanding, I'd say deepen our understanding.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, as a reader, I share that fascination for A, marginalized characters, B, characters
[Amit Varma]: which defy a simple narrative, where you're kind of exploring the multitudes that I talk
[Amit Varma]: about in my show, unpeeling those layers.
[Amit Varma]: And like I look at contemporary times, and we of course have more people alive today
[Amit Varma]: than ever before, just in sample size of things that are happening, there is so much more,
[Amit Varma]: say in any 10 year period, than say a 100 year period from the past, there are so many
[Amit Varma]: histories kind of taking place in real time, there are stories of the marginalized to be
[Amit Varma]: told here as well layers to uncover and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So when you sort of think of current times, and when you think of history, one, is it
[Amit Varma]: only what you consider historical that is already sort of there is something fixed and
[Amit Varma]: you can go back and you can uncover layers of it that interests you, or are you also
[Amit Varma]: interested in contemporary stories?
[Amit Varma]: And whatever the answer to that is, what would you say is the dividing line for you?
[Amit Varma]: Like after what point in time, are you really not interested in kind of getting into that?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it because there is such a surfeit of material available around you today that you're
[Amit Varma]: like enough people to do that, you know, let me write about the Deccan in 1800.
[Guest]: The present, on its own terms, doesn't interest me that much, frankly, for that you have good
[Guest]: journalists who are going out and putting those stories out there.
[Guest]: What interests me is perhaps making sense of why the present is in its current shape
[Guest]: by looking at the past.
[Guest]: So in that sense, if I had a cut off, I would say 1947, you know, independence, for me,
[Guest]: I'm interested in the period before that really the modern period 18th century till the mid
[Guest]: 20th century, perhaps a little bit longer into the 20th century.
[Guest]: But that is my face because I see a lot of our current political institutions, a lot
[Guest]: of the ideas, a lot of the historical experiences that has made us the people we are with our
[Guest]: strengths, but also our insecurities.
[Guest]: A lot of the reason the map of India is the way it is, a lot of this depends on events
[Guest]: that happened in these centuries, of course, the other centuries have had an impact.
[Guest]: But practically speaking, this is what appeals to me.
[Guest]: And I want to keep working on that.
[Guest]: The present in its own right, my skill set is not adequate for sort of unravelling that,
[Guest]: that I think you have journalists and people who can go into the story and dig them out.
[Guest]: I would rather dig out things from a different time and try and make sense of the present,
[Guest]: you know, by explaining why those times have resulted in this system that we have now.
[Amit Varma]: So on that note, while we are shaped by what happened, we are also shaped by what we think
[Amit Varma]: happened, right, which is all of these kind of narratives that are all around us and are
[Amit Varma]: fighting us.
[Amit Varma]: And I think we brought this up at the start of the episode that we are, you know, there
[Amit Varma]: is narrative warfare all around us.
[Amit Varma]: How much does history really matter?
[Amit Varma]: How much does it matter what actually happened or how many people Akbar may have slaughtered
[Amit Varma]: or how many temples Aurangzeb may have built?
[Amit Varma]: To me, at one level, it should not matter at all.
[Amit Varma]: And yet it is these narratives that seem to matter and not history itself.
[Guest]: Do you sometimes think that this is an insurmountable battle to fight?
[Guest]: All of history is frankly about narratives, right?
[Guest]: It is about narratives.
[Guest]: When I talk about the princely states, they were marginalised because of a British narrative.
[Guest]: You know, everything ultimately is about how we make sense of the past.
[Guest]: And this is not just our generation, all generations try to link themselves to the past.
[Guest]: When a king, you know, crowns himself and then claims he is a long lost descendant of
[Guest]: Arjuna or Krishna or whatever, he is connecting himself to something that is recognised as
[Guest]: supreme and wonderful and great.
[Guest]: All of history is about narratives and this sort of constant conversation and battle between
[Guest]: narratives to say which one or the other defines not just the present but what shape the future
[Guest]: will take.
[Guest]: You know, the current government has a huge interest and investment in shaping a historical
[Guest]: narrative because that will enable them to guide and shape the future.
[Guest]: So the three are in some ways linked that way.
[Guest]: But you know, I'll just end on one quote by Srinath Raghavan which I think he said in
[Guest]: a print interview but it's a very wise line and I think it teaches historians also humility
[Guest]: and a certain amount of modesty which is that history does not teach any lessons, historians
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: And I think that's a wonderful line and you know, it teaches us that at the end of the
[Guest]: day we are also in the business of narratives.
[Guest]: I never make the claim that I've uncovered the truth, you know.
[Guest]: I have uncovered certain evidence, certain things, I have connected the dots and said
[Guest]: that this is why this happened and these are the things that happened.
[Guest]: But it is my narrative ultimately.
[Guest]: I am by no means claiming that this is some kind of truth that will never change in time.
[Guest]: In future, somebody else may counter my version of events with another reading of history.
[Unknown]: And that's perfectly fine.
[Guest]: History, you know, recently somebody invited me for a debate, I couldn't participate saying
[Guest]: should history be rewritten and it struck me in my head that history is always being
[Guest]: rewritten.
[Guest]: You know, politicians writing it is one thing, that is political football that they are sort
[Guest]: of kicking around.
[Guest]: But history is about the past being constantly rewritten, retold, revisited, reanalyzed.
[Guest]: That is exactly what history is about.
[Guest]: So to say should Indian history be rewritten is kind of redundant because it's always being
[Amit Varma]: rewritten.
[Amit Varma]: I saw an ad on Twitter for that and I thought the question was kind of vague.
[Amit Varma]: But either ways, you know, I mean, whether history is rewritten or not, history should
[Amit Varma]: at least be read and you make it easy to do that with your wonderful narratives and incredible
[Amit Varma]: storytelling.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you so much for your time and insights today and for coming all the way to Andheri
[Amit Varma]: from Pune.
[Amit Varma]: Although you didn't come just for this, but thank you anyway.
[Amit Varma]: And thank you for writing these great books.
[Guest]: More power to you.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me for the fourth time on your podcast.
[Guest]: Hopefully this is longer than my first longest episode.
[Guest]: You've beaten your own record, but you are nowhere close to the longest.
[Guest]: Next time.
[Amit Varma]: Next time.
[Amit Varma]: I'll give you a full note.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: See you.
[Amit Varma]: Bye.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and pick up False Allies, India's Maharajas in the Age of Ravi Varma by Manu
[Amit Varma]: Pillay.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow him on Twitter at Unampillay, that's one word.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Varma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Change, listen older episodes, explore history, my friends.